Actors, Institutions, 
and the Making of EU 
Gender Equality Programs

G E N D E R  A N D   P O L I T I C S

Petra Ahrens

Gender and Politics

Series editors

Johanna Kantola

Senior Lecturer in Gender Studies

University of Tampere

Helsinki, Finland

Sarah Childs

Professor of Politics and Gender

University of London

Birkbeck, United Kingdom

“This book masterfully applies a political sociology approach to account for the 
retrenchment of EU gender equality policy at the EU level. Through an actor-
centered  approach,  Ahrens  illuminates  the  dynamics  of  EU  policy  change  and 
underlines the importance of policy instruments in shaping the power relations 
among stakeholders in a policy field.” 

—Professor Virginie Guiraudon, Sciences Po, France

“Ahrens’ comprehensive text merges sociological and political science approaches 
to analyse the EU’s 2006-2010 Roadmap for Equality and the changes that this 
policy brought to the overall structure of gender equality policy in the EU. One of 
the strengths of the text is the attention that Ahrens pays to the interplay between 
structures  and  agents,  in  which  she  considers  both  vertical  and  horizontal  pro-
cesses, and draws out hidden processes at work in the EU’s gender policy. The 
findings are important to furthering our understanding of gender equality in the 
EU and the importance of specific actors in a complex and supranational system.”
—Professor Heather MacRae, York University, Canada

The  Gender  and  Politics  series  celebrates  its  5th  anniversary  at  the  4th 
European Conference on Politics and Gender (ECPG) in June 2015 in 
Uppsala, Sweden. The original idea for the book series was envisioned by 
the series editors Johanna Kantola and Judith Squires at the first ECPG in 
Belfast in 2009, and the series was officially launched at the Conference in 
Budapest  in  2011.  In  2014,  Sarah  Childs  became  the  co-editor  of  the 
series, together with Johanna Kantola. Gender and Politics showcases the 
very best international writing. It publishes world class monographs and 
edited collections from scholars - junior and well established - working in 
politics, international relations and public policy, with specific reference to 
questions of gender. The 15 titles that have come out over the past five 
years make key contributions to debates on intersectionality and diversity, 
gender equality, social movements, Europeanization and institutionalism, 
governance and norms, policies, and political institutions. Set in European, 
US and Latin American contexts, these books provide rich new empirical 
findings and push forward boundaries of feminist and politics conceptual 
and theoretical research. The editors welcome the highest quality interna-
tional  research  on  these  topics  and  beyond,  and  look  for  proposals  on 
feminist political theory; on recent political transformations such as the 
economic crisis or the rise of the populist right; as well as proposals on 
continuing  feminist  dilemmas  around  participation  and  representation, 
specific gendered policy fields, and policy making mechanisms. The series 
can also include books published as a Palgrave pivot.

More information about this series at  
http://www.springer.com/series/14998

Petra Ahrens

Actors, Institutions, 
and the Making of EU 

Gender Equality 

Programs

Petra Ahrens
University of Antwerp
Antwerp, Belgium

Gender and Politics
ISBN 978-1-137-57059-8 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4

 

 

  ISBN 978-1-137-57060-4  (eBook)

Library of Congress Control Number: 2017947187

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2018
The author(s) has/have asserted their right(s) to be identified as the author(s) of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
This  work  is  subject  to  copyright.  All  rights  are  solely  and  exclusively  licensed  by  the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of 
translation,  reprinting,  reuse  of  illustrations,  recitation,  broadcasting,  reproduction  on 
microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic  adaptation,  computer  software,  or  by  similar  or  dissimilar  methodology  now 
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the pub-
lisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the 
material  contained  herein  or  for  any  errors  or  omissions  that  may  have  been  made.  The 
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institu-
tional affiliations.

Cover illustration: © Bildagentur-online/McPhoto-Nilsen / Alamy Stock Photo

Printed on acid-free paper

This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
The registered company address is: The Campus, 4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW, United 
Kingdom

To Nico Freya

Acknowledgements

A long journey has come to an end: the research for my dissertation has 
finally turned into this book. It would not have been possible without the 
enduring support and encouragement of several people.

First, I would like to thank my supervisors, Hildegard Maria Nickel and 
Alison  Woodward,  whose  experience,  sustained  encouragement  and 
thoughtful insights guided me through my research. Both of them gave 
me  the  reassurance  that  I  was  pursuing  the  right  questions.  Hildegard 
Maria Nickel always put me back on track when I got lost in my material 
and she pushed me to express my findings clearly and consistently. I am 
especially grateful for her encouragement to follow a sociological approach 
to the EU. Alison Woodward helped me to access the ‘Brussels circus’ and 
always welcomed my findings with enthusiasm. She must have a seventh 
sense—her support arrived whenever my motivation faltered.

The research colloquium of Hildegard Maria Nickel provided a great 
space for the discussion of my ideas and PhD drafts. In particular Magdalena 
Freudenschuss,  Irem  Güney-Frahm,  Jana  Günther,  Andreas  Heilmann, 
and Alexandra Manske never tired of reading my texts and provided me 
with essential feedback. I was lucky to find my scientific home at the Berlin 
Graduate School of Social Sciences (BGSS) at Humboldt- Universität zu 
Berlin. The BGSS supported my research project by supplying an office, an 
extraordinarily committed management and administration, as well as sci-
entific workshops and networks. Here I met my excellent peers, now good 
friends,  Bettina  Wagner,  Aydin  Süer,  Helin  Ruf-Ucar,  Christoph  Raiser 
and Marcus Engler who were always prepared to discuss my dissertation 
topic. The Institute for European Studies at the Vrije Universiteit Brussels 

vii

viii   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

became my second scientific home. I am indebted to all my colleagues and 
friends there for their inspirational and practical support, particularly to 
my  friend  Alexandra  Mihai.  The  Evangelische  Studienwerk  Villigst  e.V. 
provided substantial support by awarding me a doctoral scholarship from 
2007 to 2010.

Sabine Lang became a good friend over the years and was invaluable in 
discussing and commenting on various versions of my main chapters, as 
well as opening my eyes to important details. I would also like to thank the 
colleagues I met at various conferences who enriched my scientific horizon 
with their thoughtful feedback, notably Gabriele Abels, Rossella Ciccia, 
Johanna  Kantola,  Emanuela  Lombardo,  Heather  MacRae,  Petra  Meier, 
Celeste  Montoya,  Joyce  M.  Mushaben,  Lise  Rolandsen  Agustín,  Birgit 
Sauer, Mieke Verloo, and Anna van der Vleuten.

I owe a great debt to my interviewees—the representatives of the EU 
institutions,  NGOs,  Social  Partners  and  representatives  from  member 
states and expert groups. Without them the research and book would not 
have  been  possible.  They  contributed  to  this  study  by  providing  their 
time, energy and enthusiasm for EU gender equality policy.

I  would  like  to  thank  the  book  series  editors,  Johanna  Kantola  and 
Sarah Childs, as well as the anonymous reviewer, for their valuable and 
constructive advice that helped improve the manuscript tremendously. I 
am also grateful to the team at Palgrave Macmillan, in particular to Imogen 
Gordon Clark for her incredible patience. It was great to work with them 
during the publication process.

When transforming research into a dissertation and a dissertation into 
a  manuscript  I  benefited  greatly  from  additional  ‘technical’  support. 
Jeffrey was invaluable in helping me to improve my written English for my 
dissertation, while Richard, Julika and Christine helped format the text 
and design graphs. Throughout the years Jo van Every helped to put writ-
ing on top of my daily agenda, to remain focused and relaxed—at least 
most of the time. In the process of turning the dissertation into a book, 
Susanne Müller-Menckens was indispensable in converting the PhD style 
into readable book chapters.

Life  happens  while  theses  and  books  are  written.  I  made  wonderful 
friends inside and outside of academia who helped me to overcome the 
downs and who cheered the ups at various stages of my life. Thank you to 
my crazy Amsterdam crowd, especially to my ‘magnificent four’: Chris, 
Hanne, Jonas and Nathalie. Thank you to my marvellous friends I met in 
Berlin during the PhD writing and book making: Antje, Finzsch, Heidrun, 

  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 

 

ix

Henriette,  Ingeborg,  Jutta,  Litza,  Michaela,  Nicole,  Regina,  Roland, 
Steff, Uli, Viktoria, and Viola.

Finally, I would like to thank my parents, my brother and all those I can 
fortunately  count  among  my  family.  Your  love  and  never-ending  confi-
dence was the bedrock of my completion. Thank you to Nico Freya, sim-
ply for being amazing and reminding me of all the other important things 
in my life. Jörg, I am devoting my greatest thanks to you for your endur-
ing  support,  patience,  confidence  and  subtle  encouragement  during  all 
these years.

contents

 1 

 Introduction: EU Gender Equality Policy-Making 

      1

 2 

 3 

 4 

 5 

 Opening the Black Box: The Adoption of the  
Roadmap over Time 

 (Re)constructing Policy-Making Processes:  
The Actors’ Perspective 

 Deconstructing Network Voices and Governance  
Characteristics 

 Roadmap to Nowhere: Institutional Erosion and  
a Collapsing Network 

 6 

 Conclusion 

 Annex: Methods and Methodology 

 References 

 Index 

    71

  115

  161

  201

  237

  253

  269

  297

xi

list of figures

Fig. 1.1  Actors in EU gender equality policy during the first period 
Fig. 1.2  Actors in EU gender equality policy during the second period 
Fig. 1.3  Actors in EU gender equality policy during the third period 
Fig. 1.4  Actors in EU gender equality policy during the fourth period 
Fig. 2.1  Roadmap policy process timeline 
Fig. 4.1  Formal network map council 
Fig. 4.2  Formal network map DG I 
Fig. 4.3  Formal network map DG II 
Fig. 4.4  Formal network map MEP 
Fig. 4.5  Formal network map Social Partner 
Fig. 4.6  Formal network map NGO 

30
32
35
39
97
172
174
175
176
177
178

xiii

list of tAbles

Table 4.1  Policy programmes related to the Roadmap content 

193

xv

CHAPTER 1

Introduction: EU Gender Equality 

Policy-Making

I miss the times when women’s issues, gender issues were a priority.

(Interview with NGO representative)

In December 2015 gender equality policy-making in the European Union 
experienced a major set-back when the European Commission published 
its ‘Strategic engagement for gender equality 2016–2019’ as a Commission 
staff working document. It meant the end of gender equality policy pro-
grammes  as  previously  known.  Until  then  gender  equality  policy  pro-
grammes were published as a form of soft law which were approved by the 
Council  of  Ministers  and  the  European  Parliament,  or  at  least  as  a 
Commission communication. Although the European Commission had 
generally  changed  its  proposals  from  hard  law  to  soft  law  in  the  last 
decade, abandoning the previously effective tool of EU gender equality 
policy came as a surprise. While new public management tools became 
commonplace  (Héritier  2003),  the  Commission  ‘softened  its  soft  law’ 
even further—despite protests from the European Parliament and mem-
ber states (Ahrens and Van der Vleuten 2017). It signalled a new quality 
in the retrenchment of EU gender equality policy.

The consequences of these recent developments are yet to be investi-
gated. This book takes a close look at an earlier, but similarly significant 
change  in  the  soft  law  instrument  of  the  EU’s  gender  equality  

1

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4_12 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

policy programmes: the ‘Roadmap for Equality between Women and Men 
2006–2010’.  The  latest  retrenchment  of  gender  equality  policy  pro-
grammes  is  reflected  in  the  policy-making  processes  which  led  to  the 
Roadmap.  This  study  highlights  the  changes  and  unintended  conse-
quences in the Roadmap process. The book also helps to understand the 
possible consequences of the new ‘strategy’ by illuminating the emergence 
of major changes in the gender equality policy and its actors.

Since  the  Roadmap,  gender  equality  programmes  have  significantly 
changed in terms of content and involvement of supranational gender equal-
ity actors. The Roadmap did not have its own budget and, unlike the inter-
ventions of previous gender equality policy programmes, was not followed 
by actions that affected member states. The Roadmap was also the last pro-
gramme  which  was  developed  by  the  Directorate  General  Employment 
(DG EMPL). By analysing the policy process that led to the Roadmap we 
can better understand the background of today’s changes. Why has the EU 
gender equality policy-making changed since 2010? What were the crucial 
reasons for moving the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment to DG 
Justice? What caused the start of the European Institute for Gender Equality? 
The major policy developments behind the EU’s gender equality today were 
established by the Roadmap. It influenced which actors were involved or 
excluded and how. It also had an impact on the lack of resources and the 
topics it dealt with. The Roadmap was the first major retrenchment of policy 
programmes.  This  book  demonstrates  that  there  were  alternative  path-
ways—apart from the one leading to the Commission staff working docu-
ment ‘Strategic engagement for gender equality 2016–2019’.

By exploring the making of the Roadmap1 this book provides an in- 
depth, actor-centred, sociological case study. We still lack an understand-
ing of how actors participate in gender equality policy-making, in particular 
how they collaborate (or not) when adopting the EU’s main legislative 
tool, soft law. By analysing policy-making processes vertically (inside insti-
tutions) and horizontally (among institutions), this case study covers the 
whole spectrum of actors who are involved in this policy area.

This study shares the idea of European sociology that ‘studies should con-
centrate primarily on actors’ attitudes rather than on institutional structures’ 
(Saurugger 2014: 163). When studying EU affairs the sociological perspec-
tive allows the examination of policy-making arenas and actors beyond the 
core EU institutions. It is a perspective which has previously been associated 
with research on ‘advocacy coalitions’ (Sabatier 1998; Sabatier and Jenkins-
Smith  1993),  ‘epistemic  communities’  (Cross  2011;  Haas  1992),  policy 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING 

  3

networks (Falkner 2000) or interest groups (Greenwood 2007). The pro-
fessionalisation or expertisation of EU policy- making has recently become 
an area of research (Büttner et al. 2015) and Jacquot (2015) specified the 
way in which this trend transformed EU gender equality policy.

The turn of the century brought a number of fundamental changes in 
the EU’s gender equality policy: the enlargement to Central and Eastern 
Europe,  the  implications  of  the  Treaty  of  Amsterdam  and  the  Lisbon 
Treaty, and ultimately the reign of a centre-right EU Commission under 
José Manuel Barroso. At the same time the development of gender equal-
ity mechanisms, the number of actors and resources were larger than at any 
point in the EU’s history (Ahrens 2008). This study focuses on the conse-
quences of these turning points in gender equality policy. It describes in 
detail the reasons for the relatively weak outcome of this period. Thus, this 
study is vital for understanding the state of gender equality policy in the 
EU today, as it provides the missing link between the present and the past.
What were the key factors in the development of gender equality in the 
EU? Major changes evolved by limiting the creation of EU gender equal-
ity policy to the Commission, reducing the responsibility of member states 
and ending the close collaboration with civil society and gender equality 
actors in the European Parliament. The Roadmap process had dramatic 
consequences for the constellation of actors in EU gender equality policy 
and thereby led to more devastating effects when the policy area was trans-
ferred to DG Justice.

The examination of the Roadmap process reveals the complex interac-
tions of actors and the creative use of formal and informal rules. An inside 
look at policy programme making provides a better understanding of EU 
gender equality policy and provides explanations for the shifts in the use of 
legislative  instruments  and  limitations  in  the  policy  content.  Moreover, 
the book focuses on the time after the enlargement to Central and Eastern 
Europe. This is a period which has not yet been adequately addressed in 
research literature.

From the start gender equality policy2 has been part of the supranational 
policy  project:  the  European  Union.3  However,  it  took  political  actors 
some decades to recognize the connection between the EU and gender 
equality and establish an on-going discourse. Nowadays a European Union 
without a gender equality policy seems unthinkable, even though the issues 
in this policy area continue to trigger support as well as critique. To be able 
to understanding how EU gender equality policy changes over time we 
need to find out how much room for manoeuver the actors actually have.

4 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Explaining the ups and downs of gender equality policy across time and 
space has always been of particular interest to feminist scholars (Jacquot 
2015; Kantola 2010; Klatzer and Schlager 2014; Krizsan et al. 2012; Van 
der Vleuten 2007). As one of the latest emerging institutional and geopo-
litical arenas, the European Union (EU) has served as a focus for studying 
the changes and particular features over time (Abels and Mushaben 2012; 
Kantola and Nousiainen 2012; Lombardo and Forest 2012).

Gender equality policy is nothing new at the supranational level of the 
European Union; quite the opposite. EU gender equality developed ‘in 
a piecemeal, somewhat organic fashion, reflecting broader concerns about 
the commitment of the EU to social policy more generally, the turn in EU 
politics towards a concept of citizenship, (…)’ (Beveridge and Velluti 2008: 
2). The piecemeal, organic fashion started with a small article on equal 
pay for equal work in the Treaty of Rome. This was subsequently extended 
by a number of directives and supplemented by measures in employment 
policy.  This  has  been  followed  by  gender  equality  policy  programmes4 
since  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  and  most  recently,  by  gender  main-
streaming in the mid-1990s. While research has paid much attention to 
hard law,5 gender perspectives in policy areas and to the implementation 
of gender mainstreaming, surprisingly little attention has been devoted to 
gender  equality  policy  programmes,  apart  from  Hoskyns  (2000)  and 
Jacquot (2015).

EU  policy  programmes  are  a  common  supranational  measure.  They 
reflect one element of soft law6 and were often written as communications 
by the European Commission.7 When equipped with more outreach and 
impact they were adopted as decisions by the Council of Ministers,8 some-
times in collaboration with the European Parliament.9 Using soft law as a 
steering mechanism of EU integration has become the rule, rather than the 
exception  of  EU  policy-making  (Héritier  2003).  The  Open  Method  of 
Coordination (OMC) is one of the most prominent examples (Beveridge 
and Velluti 2008; Büchs 2007; Tholoniat 2010). Soft law tools, like bench-
marking  and  best  practice,  together  with  the  emphasis  on   subsidiarity, 
define what can be proposed by the European Commission and what will 
be accepted by member states. Gender equality with its policy programmes 
and strategy gender mainstreaming fits perfectly into this scheme (Ahrens 
and van der Vleuten 2017; Jacquot 2015). These programmes are a specific 
feature and specific soft law tool in gender equality policy. Understanding 
the making of soft law policy programmes is of great value for understand-
ing the main processes of EU integration and policy-making.

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING 

  5

From the beginning EU gender equality policy programmes initiated 
networking  among  member  states  and  involved  Social  Partners,  non- 
governmental organisations10 and member state bodies. They promoted 
gender equality on topics that were unusual to most member states at the 
time, such as supporting female employment in technical areas (Abels and 
Mushaben  2012).  In  addition  to  directives  and  gender  mainstreaming, 
gender equality policy programmes need to be understood as the third 
tool of the European Commission’s promotion of gender equality.

When investigating gender equality policy at a supranational EU level, 
it is crucial to analyse Commission communications as the standard policy 
instrument of the EU. In terms of their direct supranational impact on 
member states, EU gender equality policy programmes rank particularly 
high  on  the  list  of  measures,  although  they  are  rarely  acknowledged  as 
such. The EU shapes the gender equality discourse, gender relations and 
gender regimes in member states through hard and soft law. It sets bench-
marks and, last but not least, defines gender equality policy programmes, 
where governments often concede supranational pressure.

Looking  at  one  policy  instrument—the  Roadmap—in  detail  has  the 
advantage of making actors the main protagonists of the decision-making 
process at EU level, while analysing how and why decisions are taken in 
this policy area. The Roadmap can be seen as a paradigm for EU gender 
equality policy-making, because it was the most important framework for 
all EU equality policies. Without this specific document it would be much 
more difficult to look at the developments in this policy area from an over-
all perspective (Ahrens 2015). The Roadmap also required the voluntary 
engagement  of  actors.  This  helps  to  identify  the  usual  actors  and  their 
institutional  and  individual  attitudes  and  activities.  The  focus  on  the 
Roadmap allows for the conceptualising of EU gender equality policy as 
an area of supranational professionalisation and as a platform for the pro-
duction of expert knowledge (Büttner et al. 2015).

However,  the  in-depth  study  of  policy  programmes  may  distort  EU 
perspectives, because soft law is hardly a ‘hot issue’, e.g. the EP and the 
Council  are  hardly  engaged  in  its  design.  Particular  conflicts  between 
member  states,  feminist  advocates  in  the  EP  and  the  Commission  may 
simply be avoided due to the nature of the policy instrument. The per-
spective of this book does not incorporate the investigation of institutions 
as  socially  reproduced;  instead  it  concentrates  on  how  actors  monitor 
what  they  do,  how  they  utilise  rules  and  resources  in  the  evolving 
interaction.

6 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Another disadvantage of the Roadmap is that it is a paradigm for gen-
der equality policy. It makes it hard to tackle intersectional aspects, since 
other grounds for discrimination, as enshrined in Article 19 of the Lisbon 
Treaty, are covered by other actors and instruments.

Nevertheless, gender equality policy programmes are a typical product 
of the EU policy-making process and can be seen as an indicator of how 
political goals and subjects change over time. The impact of policy pro-
grammes as soft law measures should not be underestimated, given that 
they have always been crucial in supporting a positive action approach and 
were thus ‘powerful instruments for policy innovation’ (Abels and Mushaben 
2012: 7). According to Hoskyns (2000: 45), gender equality policy pro-
grammes followed their own implementation logic: ‘Once the action pro-
gramme  is  adopted,  and  the  budget  agreed  upon,  the  precise  aims  and 
objectives set out in the text will provide the basis as appropriate for legislative 
proposals,  the  funding  of  projects,  and  the  commissioning  of  studies  and 
research’.

The main argument of this book is that the whole character of EU gen-
der equality policy-making changed with the adoption of the Roadmap. 
The  changed  actors’  collaboration  unintentionally  lowered  the  policy 
implications  of  EU  gender  equality  policy  programmes  and  the  policy 
itself. The Roadmap signified a fundamental shift to a well-known soft law 
instrument, namely EU gender equality policy action programmes. With 
the adoption of the Roadmap, the traditional format of EU gender equal-
ity policy action programmes was abandoned. The character of EU gender 
equality policy was seriously altered due to severe changes in the interac-
tions between the actors. It shifted from close collaboration to sceptical 
observation. At a time when the development of gender equality mecha-
nisms  and  the  number  of  actors  and  resources  were  larger  than  at  any 
point in the EU’s history, the Roadmap was merely set up as a Commission 
communication  without  the  need  for  formal  agreement  by  institutions 
other  than  the  Commission.  The  decisions  concerning  the  choice  of 
instrument and the ultimate constellation of actors reduced the scope and 
impact of gender equality underwritten by EU policy statements.

What is the key to understanding gender equality policy-making in the 
EU? It is a framework of actors and structure. In the following sections I 
will introduce my critical reading of structuration theory and its applica-
tion to EU gender equality policy and analyse the milestones in the history 
of the EU gender equality policy in terms of its actors, (legislative) scope 
and content.

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  7

1.1 

  Theorising AcTors, sTrucTure And conTenT

The theoretical perspective for the investigation of the complex dynamics 
of actors and hidden aspects of the EU’s gender equality policy-making is 
informed by one of the fundamental debates in sociology and political sci-
ence: the relationship between agency and structure. While most theoreti-
cal approaches include elements of both, few systematically combine the 
two. This study argues that an actor-centred perspective is required that 
carefully takes structure into account to find out how EU gender equality 
policy-making is actually done and which actors participate. By incorpo-
rating the actor-structure perspective into the micro-political level of the 
Roadmap I will offer an inside perspective into the actors, the internal and 
external policy processes and their formal and informal rules.

A  combination  of  sociology  and  political  science  is  rarely  adopted  in 
either discipline. This is mainly due to the internal debates within the disci-
plines, rather than a lack of overlaps between them (Favell and Guiraudon 
2011). While political science turned towards economists in the 1970s and 
80s, sociology maintained its focus on cultural and ideas-driven approaches, 
such  as  social  theory,  Europeanisation  and  international  socialisation. 
Sociology asks about ‘(…) the ordering role of collective values, identity and 
the stabilizing pressure of social norms (…)’ (Favell and Guiraudon 2011: 7). 
Political science followed this approach and started studying the EU as a 
new source of identity and novel political construction.

While political science informs us about the macro-functioning of EU 
policy-making, we understand less about the details of why policies devel-
oped in a certain way. Political science helps to discover the broad aspects, 
whereas the sociological approach helps to address the detailed decision- 
making process. Who decided when and under what structural constraints? 
What  action  is  supported  in  favour  of  another  in  everyday  working 
 processes over time? It is necessary to understand how and why actors (re)
act in certain situations the way they do. What influences them? How do 
they  influence  the  structure  themselves?  How  and  why  do  they  make 
which choices? What is their reality? What are the differences and similari-
ties among actors? Investigating gender equality policy involves studying a 
complex, transversal policy area full of contradictory developments. The 
analysis of recent EU developments is a complex task due to its very nature 
as  a  ‘moving  target’  (Imig  and  Tarrow  2001),  and  particularly  because 
‘actors generally discuss policy in closed committee rooms in Brussels and in 
the member states’ (Woodward 2012: 87).

8 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

I will approach EU policy-making predominantly by adopting a socio-
logical approach to a research question that is usually addressed in political 
sciences. However, both disciplinary approaches are necessary. I will inves-
tigate gender equality policy and the social practices of actors and focus on 
what these actors actually do (Mérand 2011). This means exploring the 
procedural dynamics and their (unintended) consequences for the content 
of a policy. I will take into account a broad variety of actors, rather than 
examining only one actor in depth. The hidden aspects of policy-making 
can be revealed by examining how and why actors (re)act as they do in 
certain situations; how they are influenced and how they simultaneously 
influence the structure; why they make which choices. Following the policy 
developments through the lens of structuration theory provides space for 
both actors and structures and allows the detailed analysis of a period that 
has not been well-researched to date. The important sociological question 
is: How does the interplay of actors and structure lead to a retrenchment 
or stabilisation of the status quo, rather than a progressive policy?

This study is located in the broader theoretical context of sociological 
approaches to EU integration. It is based on the common understanding 
that the prime concern of EU integration studies should be the actors’ 
attitudes and actions, while institutional structures solely provide the con-
text (Saurugger 2014). The aim is ‘to bring the actor back in’ (Georgakakis 
2008 quoted in Saurugger 2014: 163). Sociology enquires about ‘(…) 
the ordering role of collective values, identity and the stabilizing pressure of 
social norms (…)’ (Favell and Guiraudon 2011: 7). This means analysing 
individual  actors,  their  (institutional)  ties  and  (inter)actions,  as  well  as 
their  private  and  professional  (gendered)  socialisation.  Although 
European integration theories (such as social constructivism, multi-level-
governance, network governance and others that address discourse, insti-
tutional   context  and  gendered  knowledge)  inform  the  theoretical 
approach, they are not sufficient to fully cover the actor-centred perspec-
tive. The study specifically employs the research strategy of strategic con-
duct  analysis  (Giddens  1984)  which  acknowledges  that  institutions  are 
reproduced. Yet it places an emphasis on how actors monitor their actions, 
how  they  draw  upon  rules  and  resources  in  the  development  of  their 
interactions.

We must ask how actors act the way they do within a certain context 
and structure. Actors must be at the centre of the analysis because they do 
not simply provide the context; they rather shape the character of policy- 
making.  In  terms  of  policy  processes,  we  must  ask  which  conditions 

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  9

prompt  actors  to  develop  gender  equality  policies  in  a  certain  way.  We 
need to know what changed and what remained stable in the relationships 
between actors and how this has influenced the way in which policy con-
tent was developed.

The  majority  of  actor-centred  theoretical  approaches  to  EU  policy- 
making has investigated the so-called stages heuristic of a policy cycle.11 
Although the stages heuristic have helped to structure policy process anal-
ysis by reducing its complexity, they have been rightly criticised for lacking 
causal mechanisms and ignoring multiple, interacting cycles. They remain 
descriptive and suffer from a top-down focus (Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith 
1993:  3).  The  Advocacy-Coalition-Approach  (ACF)  developed  by  Paul 
Sabatier  and  Henk  Jenkins-Smith  (1993)  has  provided  an  alternative 
actor-centred theoretical framework. It has addressed the criticism of the 
stages heuristic by focusing on policy implementation from both a top- 
down and bottom-up perspective. It has also understood the significant 
role that technical information and policy learning plays in the policy pro-
cess (Sabatier 1999). The most important hypothesis of the ACF is the 
phenomenon of advocacy coalitions which can be defined as actors’ groups 
(such as interest group leaders, agency officials, legislators, researchers and 
journalists) who work together, sometimes unconsciously, yet more often 
consciously. Advocacy coalitions share a set of normative and causal beliefs 
and engage in a non-trivial degree of co-ordinated activities over time with 
the goal of influencing policies in a subsystem. Therefore, the ACF is close 
to the concept of ‘political opportunity structures’ (McAdam et al. 1996) 
and ‘windows of opportunity’ (Kingdon 1984).

In general, the ACF tried to evaluate policy learning and the role of 
scientific information in public policy. Policy learning and experts’ advice 
are essential to European policy and more specifically to gender equality 
policy, as these studies are still not part of mainstream research (Hawkesworth 
2010; Perreira 2012). Although Sabatier (1998) suggested small adjust-
ments, the ACF has faced some severe difficulties regarding the EU.12 The 
ACF entirely fails to explain important minor changes that result in large 
differences. The institutional setting is taken for granted as an important 
framework for actors. Therefore, the ACF falls short in acknowledging that 
the structures are also subject to change and that even the actors some-
times aim to change the structures in order to reach their goals.

From the perspective of structure, institutionalism has emphasised the 
structural aspect rather than the actors’ influence. Institutions have gained 
increasing  importance  to  both  political  science  and  sociology,  although 

10 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

the two disciplines have a different focus. While political scientists have 
tended to focus on the characteristics of institutions and compared them 
to similar institutions in other circumstances (e.g. the role and function of 
supreme courts), sociologists have mainly attempted to explain the pro-
cess of institutionalisation (Peters 1999: 96).

The re-focus on institutions is mainly due to the conviction that ideas, 
norms, culture, etc. are embedded in structure, which is maintained and 
confirmed by institutions. The publications of March and Olsen (1984, 
1989) and Hall and Taylor (1996) signify this (re)initialised concern with 
institutions in (modern) societies. Institutionalism became famous because 
researchers questioned the proposition that all action is driven by actors 
who are maximising their self-interest (Immergut 1998), in contrast to the 
dominant research strands of rational choice and behaviourism. New insti-
tutionalism investigated which mechanisms in institutions shape individual 
behaviour  (Granovetter  1985)  and  how  individuals  shape  institutions 
(Cohen et al. 1972).

Peters (1999) provided an early definition which was the beginning of 
what we presently call ‘normative institutionalism’. It provided the basis 
for distinguishing between different approaches, typically summarised as 
‘historical  institutionalism’  (Pierson  and  Skocpol  2002;  Thelen  and 
Steinmo 1992), ‘rational choice institutionalism’ (Shepsle 2006; Weingast 
1996), ‘sociological institutionalism’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1983; Powell 
and  DiMaggio  1991)  and  more  recently  ‘discursive  institutionalism’ 
(Schmidt 2008).

The majority of new institutionalism scholars have failed to integrate 
gender aspects into their theoretical approaches. This gap has been filled 
by feminist scholars who have established ‘feminist institutionalism’, pro-
viding  a  combination  of  various  ‘new  institutionalisms’  and  feminist 
 perspectives (cf. Chappell 2010; Kenny 2007; Krook and Mackay 2011; 
Mackay et al. 2010; Waylen 2007).

Although  various  institutionalisms  are  certainly  sufficient  to  help  us 
understand policy-making in the EU, they were too specific for this study. 
Even sociological institutionalism fails to address essential aspects in the 
research questions at hand and ignores significant aspects, such as power 
and conflict (Ortmann 2008: 39).

Finally,  the  role  of  actors  and  how  they  are  able  to  initiate  political 
change has also been addressed by social constructivism. Constructivism 
remains  one  of  the  leading  approaches  of  feminist  theory,  as  well  as 
sociology in general (Locher and Prügl 2001). It is appealing because it 

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  11

acknowledges that nothing is set in stone and that there is constant change. 
Constructivism  investigates  how  and  why  actors  perform  certain  roles, 
how they construct their social world and how their interests and norms 
change.

Since  the  1990s  the  theory  of  international  relations  experienced  a 
‘constructivist turn’ (Checkel 1998). The theory had to take into account 
intersubjectivity—the impact of social interaction of states on the struc-
ture of the international system, as well as institutional aspects (Christiansen 
et al. 2001: 6–7). According to Christiansen et al. (2001), scholars follow-
ing the constructivist turn either belong to the sociological constructivists 
who study the impact of norms on actors’ identities, interests and behav-
iour,  or  to  the  Wittgensteinian  constructivists  who  include  language  as 
action constituting meaning (Christiansen et al. 2001: 8).

Constructivism—similar  to  structuration  theory—has  stressed  the 
influence of language, symbols, discursive formations, culture and norms 
on EU actors who might otherwise be conceived as acting ‘rationally’ in 
terms of pre-defined ‘interests’ (Lombardo 2016). Social constructivist 
approaches  to  European  integration  offer  valuable  assistance  in  under-
standing  European  governance,  although  it  has  rightly  been  criticised 
that ‘there is no one social constructivism, and that the current literature is 
more united on what is being rejected than on what is being proposed’ (Smith 
2001: 197). In terms of gender equality policy, there is a rich scholarship 
that—similar to the theoretical framework of this book—allows the focus 
on  actors  and  includes  power  as  a  central  concept  of  the  analysis 
(Lombardo 2016).

For this study it was more important to understand how and why actors 
(re)act  the  way  they  do  in  certain  situations,  how  they  influence  the 
 structure,  how  they  are  influenced  by  it  and  how  and  why  they  make 
which choices.

1.1.1 

  Structuration Theory

Theoretical perspectives that focus on either agency or structure help us to 
understand  social  practice  from  a  certain  perspective.  However,  an  in- 
depth analysis of EU gender equality policy-making requires the analysis 
of the duality—and not the dualism—of agency and structure. The study 
explores how actors act within structures, which institutional limits and 
freedoms they are aware of and how this leads to particular strategies in 
policy documents. In this respect, structuration theory proves to be the 

12 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

most useful approach, as it concentrates on the indivisible reciprocity of 
agency and structure, whereas most other approaches treat them as polar-
ised entities. Structuration theory ‘simply opens avenues for inquiry where 
several other theories reduce features that can be investigated’ (Christiansen 
et al. 2001: 12; emphasis in the original). It ‘rejects the mutual exclusiveness 
of theorising about either action or institutions’ (Wolffensberger 1991: 89).
Giddens  suggests  that  we  should  not  decide  on  either  structure  or 
agency, but rather accept the duality and indivisible connection of struc-
ture and agency.13 Structuration theory is a ‘discontinuous theory of social 
change’ that ‘places time-space distanciation and issues of power at the cen-
ter of analysis’ (Tucker 1998: 107–108). Apart from the agency-struc-
ture question, structuration theory comprises other typical sociological 
oppositions,  such  as  individual-society,  voluntarism-determinism  and 
subject-object.

A pragmatic use of structuration theory allows us to apply selective ele-
ments to various contexts, in this case EU gender equality policy. Giddens 
himself suggests this pragmatic application: ‘The concepts of structuration 
theory  (…),  should  for  many  research  purposes  be  regarded  as  sensitizing 
devices,  nothing  more’  (Giddens  1984:  326).  Structuration  theory  is  a 
social theory; it is applied in this study to offer a useful meta-theoretical 
framework for research into EU policy-making.

The study is based on a strategic conduct analysis which is appropriate 
for a focus on actors. Strategic conduct analysis is defined as: ‘Social analy-
sis which places in suspension institutions as socially reproduced, concentrat-
ing upon how actors reflexively monitor what they do; how they draw upon 
rules and resources in the constitution of interaction’ (Giddens 1984: 378).14 
It allows the investigation of the hidden aspects influencing EU gender 
equality policy, because it gives primacy to actors and their discursive and 
practical consciousness and ‘to strategies of control within defined contex-
tual  boundaries’  (Giddens  1984:  288).  This  study  analyses  how  actors 
reflect and narrate policy-making and its inherent logic and what kind of 
institutionalised setting is (re)produced in time and space.

Structuration theory is valuable as one of its central questions is how 
agents  and  structure  reproduce  routines  by  following  rules  and  using 
resources in space and time. In terms of EU gender equality policy, the 
question was turned upside down: it is no longer about how routines are 
reproduced, but rather how they are set up and by whom, how they live 
on, while there are constant changes to structure and agency. The changes 
to structure and agency occur with every treaty revision, with every new 

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  13

set-up of the Commission, EP and Council. It is surprising that gender 
equality policy remains on the agenda, albeit to a lesser extent and in a 
different form.

A critical-realist feminist theory of politics shares the basic assumptions 
of structuration theory in terms of (re)production of routines by following 
rules and resources in space and time:

A historical and materialist theory of gender as a specific social system of rela-
tions and activities, produced in and through identifiable, historically chang-
ing social relations and practices, institutions and norms in specific cultural 
settings. This theory of gender connects ontological assumptions about gender to 
specific-level theories of its production and includes, but is not limited to, dis-
cursive representations of masculinities and femininities and theories of sexual 
difference. (Jónasdóttir and Jones 2009: 44)

Feminist theory has long argued that there are no ‘natural’ gender rela-
tions and gender regimes (Walby 2004), but rather that these are all con-
structed by actors within a certain structure, time and space (Butler 1990), 
culminating  in  a  patriarchal  state  (MacKinnon  1989;  Walby  1990) 
whereby institutions and policies are gendered (Marshall 1994; Marshall 
and Witz 2004).15

Despite the (re)production of social inequalities being a central element 
(Lamla  2003),  structuration  theory  has  overseen  influences  from  gen-
dered relations. Therefore, when structuration theory is used as the theo-
retical framework, a gendered reading still needs to be developed. The fact 
that  structuration  theory  failed  to  properly  address  gender  aspects  has 
already been discussed by various researchers (Davis et al. 1991; Kahlert 
2005; Marshall 1994; Murgatroyd 1989; Wolffensberger 1991). Giddens 
himself  admitted  ‘that,  like  many  others  working  in  social  theory,  I  have 
simply not accorded questions of gender the attention they undeniably deserve’ 
(Giddens 1989: 282). Even though he tried to respond to this failure by 
raising  further  questions  when  connecting  gender  to  social  theory 
(Giddens  1989:  284),  he  did  not  sufficiently  address  the  way  in  which 
social life is gendered.16

Integrating a gender perspective means being sensitive about how gen-
der is socially constructed and reproduced in the everyday life of actors, as 
well as in structure. Marshall stresses that taking ‘gendered subjectivity’ into 
account is ‘central to an understanding of the way gender becomes embedded 
in both subject and structure, and their relationship’ (Marshall 1994: 94). 

14 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

One way of doing this is to refer to gendered power relations rooted in 
symbolic  structures  and  the  androcentric  definition  of  reality  (Bourdieu 
2005).  Butler  (1990)  has  pointed  to  three  central  assumptions  that  are 
universal, out of time and socially constructed: the ‘reification’ of gender 
through dichotomous and hierarchical constructions of binarity, the sym-
bolic  reliance  on  the  male  model  as  the  standard  norm,  and  essentialist 
approaches  presenting  masculinity  and  femininity  as  ‘a  natural  sort  of 
being’, resulting in ‘natural’ men’s and women’s behaviour’.

Integrating  a  gender  perspective  in  structuration  theory  means  con-
necting different aspects on different levels and developing a ‘concept of 
engendered structure’ (Wolffensberger 1991: 93). First, in relation to the 
individual actor this means taking account of ‘doing gender’ and looking at 
gender as an effect of performance (Butler 1990: 136). This leads to the 
dichotomous and asymmetrical construction of gender roles with conse-
quences  for  knowledgeable  agents.  Second,  taking  account  of  the  gen-
deredness of organisations (Acker 1990, 1992; Benschop and Dorreward 
1998), gendered power relations (Bourdieu 2005; Davis et al. 1991) and 
gender  symbolic  orders  (Connell  1987)  which  influence  the  duality  of 
structure. Third, the interplay results in an overall specific content of gen-
der equality policy. These gendered issues are illustrated in the remainder 
of this chapter.

1.1.2 

  Structuration Theory and EU Gender Equality Policy

When  examining  EU  gender  equality  policy-making  it  is  necessary  to 
translate Giddens’ concept of agency into the concept of actors. At the 
same time Giddens’ concept of structure needs to be put more into the 
context  of  EU  policy  processes.  Applying  structuration  theory  and  the 
concept of the duality of structure also need to be adapted to the specific 
transnational setting of EU gender equality policy-making. Furthermore, 
we need to discuss content as a product and outcome of the interplay of 
agency and structure.

 Agency
In Giddens’ theory of structuration, individuals are ‘spontaneous agents, 
capable of choice, particularly in relation to the constraining powers of the 
state’  (Loyal  2003:  25).  Therefore,  actors  are  highly  knowledgeable 
agents: ‘every social actor knows a great deal about the conditions of repro-
duction of the society of which he or she is a member’ (Giddens 1979: 5).

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  15

Consequently,  Giddens’  understanding  of  the  concept  ‘agency  and 

action’ is phenomenological:

It is analytical to the concept of agency: (a) that a person ‘could have acted 
otherwise’ and (b) that the world as constituted by a stream of events-in-process 
independent of the agent does not hold out a predetermined future. (Giddens 
1976: 75)

When applied to EU policy this means that actors, such as civil servants, 
are aware of their individual institutional situatedness and—at the same 
time—aware of how ‘their’ institution is placed vis-à-vis other institutions. 
They are aware of multiple constraints, as well as ‘windows of opportunity’ 
(Kingdon  1984).  They  implicitly,  and  sometimes  even  explicitly,  know 
their options and have a choice to act in different ways.

 The Knowledgeable Agent
Structuration theory includes a stratification model of the agent and dis-
tinguishes between three ‘layers’ of cognition/motivation (Giddens 1984: 
5–8, 41–51):

•  Unconscious  motives/cognition:  ‘The  unconscious  includes  those 
forms of cognition and impulsion which are either wholly repressed from 
consciousness or appear in consciousness only in distorted form’ (Giddens 
1984: 4–5).

•  Discursive consciousness: ‘What actors are able to say, or to give verbal 
expression to, about social conditions, including especially the conditions 
of their own action; awareness which has a discursive form’ (Giddens 
1984: 374)

•  Practical consciousness: ‘What actors know (believe) about social con-
ditions, including especially the conditions of their own action, but can-
not express discursively; no bar of repression, however, protects practical 
consciousness as is the case with unconscious’ (Giddens 1984: 375)

The three layers relate to ‘the motivation of action (which may be partly 
unconscious),  the  rationalisation  of  action  (agents’  articulated  reason  for 
action), and the reflexive monitoring of action (agents’ knowledge of what 
they are doing)’ (Bryant and Jary 2001: 13). The conditions of individual 
situations are not considered the main factors that influence knowledge-
ability.  Instead,  Giddens’  concept  of  knowledgeability  heavily  relies  on 

16 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

one’s individual ability and motivation to learn and change the scope of 
one’s practical consciousness, thereby discharging the way in which struc-
tures play out differently for different individuals.

In this study practical consciousness is considered the most important 
layer in terms of agency and structure; it steers everyday life and mirrors 
people’s understanding of the world. Agents use their practical conscious-
ness to follow the institutional order in day-to-day life without question-
ing it, which means that ‘they reproduce its ‘factivity” (Giddens 1984: 331, 
quote in the original). Agents thereby contribute to the reproduction of 
the institutional order and maintain the same conditions of action, includ-
ing its gendered aspects. The reproduced factivity not only comprises con-
sequences  for  the  agent  in  question,  but  also  produces  unintended 
consequences, with the effect that other individuals might have to develop 
a similar practical consciousness within the same institution.

An example from EU policy in general is the on-the-job training of new 
civil  servants  and  their  adjustment  to  institutional  norms  and  rules 
(Checkel 2005; Hooghe 2005). Everyday work forms practical conscious-
ness by discursive interaction with others. It can be expected that agents 
are,  to  some  extent,  able  to  reflect  upon  their  practical  consciousness 
within a certain institution. Given that practical and discursive conscious-
ness is not strictly divided, an agent is somewhat able to use his or her 
discursive  consciousness  and  is  capable  of  elaborating  on  reasons  and 
motivations for day-to-day-routines.

Giddens calls this modern phenomenon ‘reflexive monitoring’: agency 
includes the possibility of acting otherwise, providing reasons for one’s 
actions and reflecting upon and monitoring them (Giddens 1976). The 
agents’ ability to reflect upon their actions is extremely useful when inves-
tigating  EU  gender  equality  policy-making.  Interviewees  describe  their 
day-to-day-routines and at the same time they are able to distance them-
selves from them; they criticise the routines and explain gaps, failures and 
changes; they explain how they should be changed, while following the 
routine. In fact, gender equality policy can be seen as a policy area where 
it is constantly expected that (institutional/political) agents will challenge 
practical  consciousness,  where  they  will  question  it  and  question  the 
reproduction  of  the  social  system  and  work  towards  change  (Jacquot 
2010). This special feature of gender equality policy—the constant strug-
gle between practical and discursive consciousness with the aim of chang-
ing the social system—renders structuration theory as a valuable theoretical 
framework.

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  17

The  knowledgeability  of  actors  is  limited  in  the  structure,  as  well  as 
informed by practical and discursive consciousness. Knowledgeability has 
spatial breadth. Agents are only aware of their own environment, but not 
of the other spheres of social life (laterally and vertically). For example, 
although they have a basic understanding of other institutions, agents can 
seldom  assess  the  specific  constraints  other  individuals  and  institutions 
have in their work and why they did not choose to act in a different way. 
There are unacknowledged conditions of action, including unconscious 
and  practical  knowledge  and  unintended  consequences  of  action.  This 
means that socialisation and the specific contextual knowledge determine 
how people react to specific requests and problems.

Lombardo et al. (2009) provide important examples of how actors use 
their  knowledgeability  for  shaping  gender  equality  policy  in  a  certain 
direction,  e.g.  when  bending,  stretching  or  shrinking  the  policy  scope. 
Different choices are available to different actors and depend on the given 
structure and on-going processes. Lombardo et al. also point to the unin-
tended consequences of choices:

The way in which policy actors will use or reinterpret a fixed meaning is rather 
unpredictable  in  the  sense  that  it  can  have  different  effects  than  the  ones 
expected  both  from  actors  in  the  meaning’s  elaboration  and  the  actors  who 
engage in challenging this meaning. (Lombardo et al. 2010: 117)

In this respect Giddens provided three analytical aspects of interaction: 
power, communication and sanction. Giddens defines power ‘as the capa-
bility to secure outcomes where the realisation of these outcomes depends upon 
the  agency  of  others’  (Giddens  1976:  111,  emphasis  in  the  original).  In 
interactions actors ‘could have done otherwise’ (Giddens 1979: 92), they 
have ‘transformative capacity’, and as such ‘power is intrinsically related to 
human agency’ (Giddens 1979: 92).

In terms of gender equality policy, actors insert their ideas into policy 
documents. Their understanding of gendered relations reflects the politi-
cal goals they consider appropriate. Thus actors not only perform an insti-
tutional role, they also influence and shape this role, which subsequently 
affects the policies. Individual actors gain their knowledge in relation to 
gender equality from their own socialisation. The understanding of gen-
der  equality  is  also  shaped  by  different  contexts  in  different  countries 
(Esping-Andersen  2002;  Sainsbury  1996).  Actors  combine  ideas  about 
content and are connected with the policy processes.

18 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

 Agency and Actors
Agency and actors are related, although they are not identical. The term 
‘actors’ is a substitute for a variety of possible elements and includes indi-
viduals, groups, institutions and organisations. Whereas Giddens predom-
inantly defines agency on an individual level and places it vis-à-vis structure, 
in this study agency is translated into the term actors, which captures two 
different, yet connected relationships:

•  Individuals in relation to the institution or organisation within which 
they work. This is a direct transfer of Giddens’ structuration theory 
into a defined societal subsystem, namely politics.

•  Individuals as representatives of their institution vis-à-vis other insti-
tutions  within  the  political  subsystem.  For  example,  this  refers  to 
how  those  responsible  for  gender  equality  within  institutions  or 
organisations,  such  as  the  European  Commission,  European 
Parliament, Social Partners or NGOs, locate their institutions in rela-
tion to other institutions.

Structuration  theory  mainly  speaks  of  individuals  according  to  the 
first  definition  and  offers  few  insights  into  the  relationship  between 
individual  actors  and  the  institution  they  represent,  as  defined  in  the 
second  sense.  Structuration  theory  clearly  underestimates  the  way  in 
which  individual  actors  consciously  and  unconsciously  act  as  if  they 
were institutional actors. This study will show that actors think about 
their institution, about the roles, interests and needs of the institutions 
they represent. Actors represent their institution, they speak for their 
institutions,  and  therefore  the  institutions  need  to  be  seen  as  actors 
themselves. The individual actor and the institution become one; they 
are the same.

Actors—individuals, 

institutions,  organisations  and  groups—are 
defined  as  an  entity  that  participates  in  the  EU  gender  equality  policy- 
making. This includes those who are present and visible and those who 
participate in the background. In this sense, non-participating actors are 
also part of the actors’ constellation, as long as they are relevant to gender 
equality policy. Relevant in this context are those actors who perform a 
certain role in the policy process, such as institutions that have to adopt 
policy proposals (although they do not actively participate in the formula-
tion of gender equality policy content). Actors, such as NGOs and interest 
groups which try to participate in the policy process and aim to make their 

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  19

voices  heard,  are  also  relevant,  even  though  they  are  ignored  by  the 
decision- making institutions.

Although Giddens does not make this distinction, it helps to differenti-
ate  between  these  three  groups:  (1)  participating  actors,  (2)  non- 
participating actors that try to participate and (3) non-participating actors 
that have a certain role to perform. However, the main focus here is on the 
first group. The distinction is vital in order to understand the actors’ con-
stellation and the overall policy-making context relevant to each actor.

The role and function that institutions perform in the tension between 
gender equality policy and the rest of the EU policy system is a question 
of power—which is a typical sociological question. Moreover, the role and 
function of institutions is also tied to the question of informal and per-
sonal ties (Woodward 2004). The analysis of the institutional and the per-
sonal  roles  that  people  play  is  a  useful  distinction  in  respect  of  gender 
equality policy. It is a norm-driven policy area, which means that people 
may sometimes be torn between their political motivation and the institu-
tional role they have to fulfil. Indeed, this applies to any kind of political 
orientation, not only to feminists.

For example, the institutional role might be a civil service job in the 
Commission. Civil servants perform an institutional role. This means they 
have to follow rules: who to contact, when and for what reason. At the 
same  time  the  rules  are  subject  to  change  in  many  ways.  For  instance, 
when treaties, commissioners, etc. change, the job portfolio might also 
change. Actors might switch to another job where they have comparable, 
but different tasks. This means that civil servants have a certain institu-
tional role in the policy process, although the content can change. They 
might work with new colleagues, followed by changes within the job port-
folio. Therefore, there are always dynamic and stable elements in the life 
of actors.

 Structure
In structuration theory the interaction of subjects is interlocked with the 
reproduction  of  structuring  properties  ‘allowing  the  ‘binding’  of  time-
space in social systems, the properties which make it possible for discernibly 
similar social practices to exist across varying spans of time and space and 
which lend them ‘systemic’ form’ (Giddens 1984: 17, quotes in the origi-
nal). This means that subjects interact within the structure and cannot do 
this outside the structure; at the same time they reproduce this very struc-
ture  by  the  interaction  taken.  Giddens  emphasises  that  structure  is  not 

20 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

merely a reproduced constraint, but also offers enabling paths for sub-
jects: ‘Structures must not be conceptualized as simply placing constraints 
upon human agency, but as enabling. This is what I call the duality of struc-
ture. Structures can always in principle be examined in terms of their struc-
turation as a series of reproduced practices. To enquire into structuration of 
social practices is to seek to explain how it comes about that structures are 
constituted through action, and reciprocally how action is constituted struc-
turally’17 (Giddens 1976: 161, emphasis in the original).

Structuration theory does not clearly define the relationship between 
actors and institutions. The distinction between structure and structural 
entities is much clearer, i.e. institutions: ‘A structure is not a ‘group’, ‘col-
lectivity’  or  ‘organization’:  these  have  structures’  (Giddens  1976:121, 
quotes and emphasis in the original).

This  study  sees  structure  and  its  structuring  properties  as  part  of  the 
logical  framework  of  policy  processes  and  analyses  its  inherent  logic  of 
rules, resources, routines and time-space-relations in the EU system. The 
concept of the duality of structure assumes that there are constant changes 
and dynamics in the policy process. It realises that there are no stable sys-
tems,  but  different  stages,  depending  on  the  institution,  the  actors  and 
other perspectives. These varying systems and stages never take place simul-
taneously, but have different speeds, powers and effects. Systems and struc-
tures only have a virtual existence (Bryant and Jary 2001). Structure only 
exists in the memory of knowledgeable actors and is reproduced in action.

 Rules, Resources and Routines
One particularly useful argument of structuration theory is ‘that people fol-
low rules patterned in social structure; collective knowledge of social rules is 
the condition of social interaction’ (Tucker 1998: 81). All rules are trans-
formable,  transferable  and  generalisable  to  other  situations  (Giddens 
1979).  ‘Rules  are  inseparable  from  the  exercise  of  social  power’  (Tucker 
1998: 82) and ‘rules and resources drawn upon in the production and repro-
duction of social action are at the same time the means of system reproduc-
tion’  (Giddens  1984:  19).  As  a  result,  rules  play  a  significant  role  in 
constituting meaning; they are closely connected with sanctions, they are 
applied techniques or generalisable procedures (Giddens 1984: 20f).

Giddens distinguishes between formulated (codified) rules, such as laws 
or bureaucratic rules, and rules which are relevant to general questions18 
(Lamla 2003). While the former are abstract and sometimes used to estab-
lish sanctions, the latter are rarely challenged. The rules are followed by 

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  21

reacting to situations; for example, language only exists in the moment 
when it is spoken or written, and people often react strongly against others 
who do not follow the rules and conventions of language (Giddens 1984: 
21, 24). Such strong reactions also apply to violations of the social order, 
as Garfinkel’s studies on ‘normal’ behaviour have shown (Giddens 1984: 
23). Rules not only work by themselves, they can also become ‘frames’, 
which are ‘clusters of rules which help to constitute and regulate activities, 
defining them as activities of a certain sort and as subject to a given range of 
sanctions’  (Giddens  1984:  86).  Frames  provide  certainty  to  the  knowl-
edgeable agent, they can be used unconsciously, shape interaction and to 
some degree guarantee predictability—routines, so to speak.19

Rules and routines are therefore of special relevance to politics. Actors 
are often very conscious of codified formal and informal rules that guide 
the course of policy-making. Routine is an important aspect in the con-
text of the EU, because we can explore the reasoning of actors to better 
understand which rules they follow and where these rules come from, if 
they were transformed or transferred from a different context. This also 
means that actors have ideas about the content of gender equality policy 
(meaning),  institution-related  knowledge  (power)  and  process-related 
knowledge (conduct).

Resources are also an important basis for reproducing social practices 
by  providing  actors  with  power.  Structuration  theory  differentiates 
between allocative and authoritative resources. The former refers to ‘trans-
formative  capacity  generating  command  over  objects,  goods  or  material 
 phenomena’,  and  the  latter  to  ‘transformative  capacity  generating  com-
mand over persons or actors’ (Giddens 1984: 33). Both kinds of resources 
are  important  for  the  study  of  EU  gender  equality  policy-making.  For 
example, the control over allocative resources includes the power to assign 
or withdraw budgets, offices and other equipment to policy areas. This 
control also demonstrates how important a policy area is considered to be. 
The control over authoritative resources translates into ‘the co-ordination 
of the activity of human agents’ (Giddens 1984: XXXI). It is a crucial ele-
ment of policy-making and includes questions like: who is responsible for 
which  policy  area,  how  many  people  are  responsible  and  whether  they 
have the power to decide and enforce decisions.

Resources are not equally distributed among men and women, nor do 
resources and rules work in the same way for men and women; on the 
contrary, they function as ‘media of twofold reproduction’ and are repro-
duced  together  in  interaction  (Wolffensberger  1991:  93,  104).  When 

22 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

investigating EU policies, gendered power relations have to be considered. 
At the level of general policies there is a common understanding which 
Directorate General is powerful (e.g. Trade, Competition, Enterprise and 
Industry,  Internal  Market)  or  powerless  (e.g.  Education  and  Culture, 
Employment, Health and Consumer Protection) (Hooghe 2002).

Rules and resources can be understood as aspects of (structural) rou-
tines. The EU can be defined as a political construct sui generis: it is always 
developing,  never  finished,  and  this  logically  applies  to  all  its  routines. 
Central decision-making routines are prescribed in the treaties, although 
they might be changed with every treaty revision. This not only leads to 
the reproduction of a special EU social life, a distinctive EU social system, 
but also to new routines. The important question is therefore to check 
which routines exist, how these routines constrain the actors and how they 
relate to these constraints. Which routines do the actors accept? Which do 
they carry out every day without even questioning them? One routine that 
steers EU gender equality policy-making is the division of competencies. 
In the EU it is surprising that some of the actors from different institu-
tions do not contact each other, even though they are all responsible for 
this policy area. Although they often hold the same opinion about political 
goals, they do not make an effort to connect; they instead stick to institu-
tional rules and routines, such as the sequencing of participation in the 
adoption process of (non-)legislative proposals.

While they reproduce structure, actors are not free from constraints. 
This is due to rules and resources, as well as timing, such as the fact that 
only certain choices are available at a certain point in time. At the same 
time the decisions influence further developments and subsequent choices. 
Single agents cannot control the choices that are available. They have to 
decide between those that are available in the context of broad institutions 
(Tucker 1998).

 Time and Space
While rules and resources are independent of time, space and subject, they 
still must be mobilised in action and function as memory traces. They are 
thereby simultaneously indivisible in time and space (Ortmann 2008: 36). 
Policy processes follow their own (bureaucratic) logic and timeline; they 
can be caused by simultaneous events, such as legislative acts, changes in 
the presidency and the Commission. At certain points in time various pol-
icy processes intersect and sometimes influence the acceleration or slowing 
down of a specific policy area.

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  23

The communication of meaning, the exercise of power and the evalua-
tive  judgment  of  conduct  structure  social  practices  and  relations  over 
space and time. Aspects of meaning, power and judgment of conduct are 
of great importance within this study, considering the content of gender 
equality  policy  (meaning),  actors’  relations  (power)  and  process-related 
information (conduct).

The Roadmap process included a timeline for its development and imple-
mentation, which was interwoven with the specific way actors and structure 
related to each other in gender equality policy. Woodward confirmed that, 
prior to the Roadmap, a velvet triangle which consisted of civil servants, 
parliamentarians  and  academics  created  their  own  rules  and  networks  to 
advance gender equality policy (Woodward 2004). Jacquot verified that this 
specific mode of policy-making no longer exists and that today’s actors act 
along the general EU system rules and routines (Jacquot 2015).

Routines and planning vary between DGs, most of which have their 
own  institutional  time  frames,  rather  than  a  pre-set  Commission-wide 
one. Consequently, policy processes are simultaneous and unconnected, 
while routines and planning differ depending on the policy area. There are 
some overarching processes in the EU, such as Council meetings, changes 
of the Commission and EP elections, which generally structure policy pro-
cesses in the EU. Time frames in the civil service of the Commission, EP, 
Council and other EU institutions are not interrupted by these overarch-
ing  processes  and  continue  while  the  overarching  processes  take  place. 
This means that the formulation of policy documents, policy programmes 
and legislative processes are relatively independent of those overarching 
processes.

 Content
The content of gender equality policy is an expression of different ideas 
and cultures. Ideas, norms and cultures become visible, as they are put 
into a written form that cannot be changed after publication. The content 
of  a  policy  consists  of  the  topics  that  political  actors  are  working  on. 
Policies are defined by the scope and topics which are discussed. This also 
means  that  the  content  varies  across  time  and  space.  Content  is  not 
designed from scratch; it rather rests on former policies and topics, on new 
actors who provide new topics, sometimes bending, stretching or shrink-
ing the former content (Lombardo et al. 2009).

To put it simply, content is the outcome or the result of the interplay 
between actors and structure, the result of policy-making which is defined 

24 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

as ‘an ongoing process of planning, executing and evaluating interventions 
by  states  at  different  levels  of  government,  including  the  establishment  of 
institutions, to define the rules steering society’ (Lombardo et al. 2013: 679). 
When analysing the content it is possible to trace normative influences and 
ideas in the policy area. How the content is produced can only be investi-
gated by analysing the participating actors and their connections, as well 
as processes that lead to the final content of gender equality within the 
context of the EU system.

Actors and structure produce policy content in a certain way. The spe-
cific combination of actors and their (in)formal relationships and institu-
tionalised policy processes determine the content. The process is highly 
influenced by ideas about gender equality policy and cultural constraints 
within different national contexts, as well as institutionalised processes on 
a transnational level.

Consequently,  policy  content  needs  to  be  identified  and  connected 
with the terms ‘actors’ and ‘structure’ in order to capture the whole EU 
gender equality policy. Structuration theory does not provide the answers 
for how to apply structuration theory to empirical research in a policy area. 
In fact, the missing answer is caused by the very nature of structuration 
theory as a social theory, which aims to explain societal systems on a meta- 
theoretical level and not within societal sub-fields, such as policy-making. 
Structuration theory explains relations at an abstract level and its applica-
tion in ‘reality’ and what it means in detail are explained in other works.20
The content of a policy is not fixed; it can be changed, decided through 
discussions and it is not something that appears out of nowhere. In case 
of the EU it is necessary to ask how primary and secondary EU legislation 
defines gender equality policy. This includes the question why some topics 
are excluded, suppressed or not addressed—despite the legal possibility. It 
also  needs  to  be  investigated  how  legislative  definitions  evolve  and 
develop.

Structuration theory emphasises that agents who constitute and develop 
structure are also simultaneously constrained by this structure. The inter-
play can be seen as a dynamic, ongoing process of affirming, changing and 
reconstituting  structure  (Ortmann  2008).  This  process  is  not  uni- 
directional;  it  is  an  interwoven  relationship,  a  reciprocal  causation  of 
agency and structure. This reciprocity implies a dynamic process linking 
structure and agency. In terms of EU policy-making this means that insti-
tutions  and  actors  are  changing  each  other  gradually  in  an  iterative 
process.

1.1  THEORISING ACTORS, STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 

  25

According to Giddens: ‘Interaction is constituted by and in the conduct 
of subjects; structuration, as the reproduction of practices, refers abstractly to 
the  dynamic  process  whereby  structures  come  into  being.  By  the  duality  of 
structure I mean that social structures are both constituted by human agency, 
and yet at the same time are the very medium of this constitution’ (Giddens 
1976: 121, emphasis in the original). Structuration theory aims to explain 
how ‘structures are constituted through action, and reciprocally how action 
is constituted structurally’  (Giddens  1976:  161).  Hence  the  term  struc-
turation  contains  a  double  meaning,  structuring  and  structure;  process 
and result, so to speak (Ortmann 2008: 33).

The most important aspect is to track changes on the level of actors and 
structure in order to understand the role of rules and resources, as well as 
the  possible  scope  of  knowledgeability  and  capability.  Given  that  the 
Roadmap can be taken as the fixed outcome at a certain point in time, it 
consequently becomes the reference point for the analysis of the duality of 
structure. We will have to understand the Roadmap in its historical context 
of EU gender equality policy. By examining the historical background we 
find contradictions between announced goals and their translation into pol-
icies and detect indications of speeding up and slowing down processes.

Comparing the different narratives of how actors draft, negotiate and 
decide the content of gender equality policy programmes helps us to under-
stand how they reconstruct certain institutional rules and routines and how 
they rationalise their actions. Looking at the policy process also helps us to 
discover differences in actors’ knowledgeability; e.g. what they know about 
the actions and routines of other actors and how they interpret them.

1.1.3 

  Methods and Methodology21

One of the premises of this study’s sociological approach is that there is 
not a single, ideal process, whereby actors reconstruct policy processes by 
developing  their  own  narratives.  Narratives  are  necessary  requisites  for 
actors to locate events on a timeline. This entails their perceptions of how 
the policy area is structured in terms of ideas, norms and power and how 
it is located in the overall EU context. Actors make sense of the content of 
gender equality policy according to their own views of the policy area by 
describing and interpreting events across time and space.

This study combines semi-structured expert interviews, documentary 
analysis and tools of qualitative network analysis. The overall approach is 
best described as qualitative, inductive and theory-generating within the 

26 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

broader  context  of  grounded  theory  (Glaser  and  Strauss  1967).  The 
empirical research is based on the everyday work of the interviewees and 
their social interactions. This approach provides a ‘thick description’ and 
analyses a single case by studying policy processes from a feminist, inter-
pretivist perspective (Vromen 2010: 249).

From  March  to  July  2008  thirty-three  expert  interviews  were  con-
ducted  in  the  European  Commission,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
European Council, the European Economic and Social Committee with 
members of different NGOs, Commission expert groups, Social Partners 
and interinstitutional groups. In addition, the empirical analysis rests upon 
the  analysis  of  a  large  quantity  of  primary  sources22  of  EU  institutions, 
such  as  the  Commission,  the  Council,  the  Parliament,  as  well  as  other 
actors in the policy process.

The descriptions and interpretations of these actors contain the reasons 
for the way the policy programme and its content were adopted. They can 
be  interpreted  as  an  expression  of  Merton’s  Thomas  theorem,  the  self- 
fulfilling prophecy: ‘If men define situations as real, they are real in their 
consequences. Men respond not only to the objective features of the situation, 
but also, and at times primarily, to the meaning this situation has for them’ 
(Merton 1957: 475).

When analysing the policy process of the Roadmap a micro-sociological 
approach was best suited to reveal the actors’ choices: Why did they use 
strategic framing or abolish more conflictual steps that would question the 
existing  rules  and  routines?  Rules  and  resources  cannot  be  detected  by 
asking directly, as routines are embedded in practical consciousness. It is 
therefore necessary to reconstruct the policy process from the narratives 
and analyse the questions: Which rules and resources played a significant 
role? When, why and how were rules and resources acknowledged? Which 
of the rules played a role? This case study provides a historical perspective 
on the Roadmap and shows the path the policy programmes followed.

1.2 

  The hisTory of eu gender equAliTy Policy 

AcTors

Gender equality policy23 is nothing new at the supranational level of the 
European Union; quite the opposite. EU gender equality developed ‘in a 
piecemeal, somewhat organic fashion, reflecting broader concerns about the 
commitment of the EU to social policy more generally, the turn in EU politics 
towards  a  concept  of  citizenship  (…)’  (Beveridge  and  Velluti  2008:  2). 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  27

Gender  equality  policy  began  as  a  question  about  women’s  rights  and 
‘deficient women’ who need special protection and support, as defined in 
article 119.24 It took a long time to reach the scope of gender equality 
policy in the EU as it is today.

The change in the policy area over time depends on which actors and 
institutions are relevant, it depends on the balance of power, the formal 
and informal rules they must follow and the tools at their disposal. As a 
supranational arena of policy-making the EU offers several possible access 
points for stakeholders who aim to express their interests in EU institu-
tions. The way in which different actors organise their interests and how 
EU  institutions  respond  to  them  reveal  the  complexity  of  negotiations 
within an increasingly complicated system.

The activities of different institutions have been analysed from an actor’s 
perspective (Braithwaite 2001; Hantrais 2003; Schmidt 2005). Relationships 
between the EP and the Commission or the Social Partners and transnational 
policy  networks  have  also  attracted  interest  from  women’s  organisations 
(Lang 2009). So has the overall logic of the policy area (Woodward 2012). 
Others studied the perspective of the institutions and how the EU acceler-
ated the set-up of networks (Montoya 2008, 2009). Some actors are policy 
entrepreneurs  in  various  constellations,  such  as  policy  networks  (Falkner 
2000; Knoke 1990; Marsh 1998), advocacy coalitions (Sabatier 1998) or 
interest  groups  (Greenwood  2007).  Actors  can  also  wear  multiple  hats, 
including their personal motivation and the institution which they represent 
(Lang 2009). Research on women’s policy networks has focused on partici-
pation possibilities (Bretherton and Sperling 1996), network ties of wom-
en’s movements and their representation on the web (Lang 2009; Prudovska 
and Ferree 2004), as well as the establishment and creation of new policy 
networks in different policy areas (Montoya 2008, 2009; Zippel 2004).

Over time the EU developed three different, yet overlapping tools to 
steer supranational and member states’ performance: legislation, policy pro-
grammes and gender mainstreaming. The history of gender equality policy 
in the EU shows that the actors, structure and content of a policy were not 
fixed for each tool. Each of the three aspects changed and, more impor-
tantly,  can  be  changed.  The  following  sections  illuminate  these  changes 
over time. In terms of actors we will better understand who started gender 
equality policy at which time and how the interactions worked between the 
various  actors.  I  will  examine  who  has  a  long  history  in  gender  equality 
policy and who joined more recently. This factor is important, given that 
experience  in  gender  equality  policy  also  affects  actors’  knowledgeability 

28 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

and  understanding  of  which  routines  and  rules  play  a  role.  While  actors 
linked to employment policy have the longest tradition in EU gender equal-
ity policy, the majority of political actors joined within the last decade; not 
because they voluntarily understood that gender equality is a question of 
relevance, but because gender mainstreaming obliged actors to deal with 
various  gender  inequalities.  With  the  Treaty  of  Amsterdam  more  policy 
areas became affected regardless of their own logic and structures.

In this respect the fixation of gender mainstreaming in the treaties made 
an increasing number of actors relate to gender equality even though their 
own  history  rarely  included  it.  The  actors’  lack  of  consciousness  about 
gendered inequalities was reflected in gender equality research. Only for 
the last three decades has gender studies become a growing research area 
where issues are now studied that were previously taken as gender neutral. 
The  trickle-down  effect  of  research  results  to  policy  makers  took  (and 
takes)  time.  Apart  from  that,  policy  areas  in  the  European  Union  vary 
significantly  in  their  openness  towards  gender  mainstreaming,  based  on 
their internal routines and history (Pollack and Hafner-Burton 2000).

In terms of structure the rules of the game for gender equality policy 
changed  with  the  introduction  of  gender  mainstreaming,  as  the  treaties 
must now be interpreted with an understanding that all policy areas of the 
EU ought to promote gender equality. While research has recognised the 
scope, we will learn from this study that policy makers lag behind in their 
understanding of gender mainstreaming and gender aspects in their policy 
area. For example, the civil servants in the Commission have sometimes 
worked in their policy area since before the introduction of the treaty arti-
cle on gender mainstreaming. This is particularly true for higher level man-
agers who are predominantly men and who often ‘made their way’ through 
the  institution.  Consequently,  powerful  actors  have  a  narration  of  their 
policy area which is different from the narration of those who have come 
across gender studies or who have worked with current research findings.

1.2.1 

  Introducing Equal Pay and the Founding 

of the European Communities

The first period of gender equality policy started with the foundation of 
the  European  Communities  by  Belgium,  France,  Germany,  Italy, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands in 1957. It lasted until the first eco-
nomic crisis in Western Europe in the 1970s. Back then gender equality 
policy  was  merely  declamatory  (Lemke  2004).  There  was  no  political 
action nor political will at a supranational level (Klein 2006), although the 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  29

Treaty of Rome (1957) contained Article 119 on equal pay for women 
and men: ‘Each Member State shall in the course of the first stage ensure and 
subsequently maintain the application of the principle of equal remuneration 
for equal work as between men and women workers.’

The treaty provision on equal pay was advocated by France and inspired 
by the Convention Number 100 of the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO) from 1951. France feared economic disadvantages because it was 
the only country with provisions for equal pay for women and men at the 
time (Ellina 2003; Hantrais 2000). Article 119 specified the meaning of 
equal remuneration and—because it was included in the customs union 
section  of  the  treaties—included  the  deadline  of  31st  December  1961 
(Van der Vleuten 2007: 52f). However, the implementation of Article 119 
failed, even though the Commission—as the ‘watchdog’ of the treaties—
had the competency to take action and was also consulted by the European 
Parliament and the European Economic and Social Committee (Van der 
Vleuten  2007).  The  Commission,  in  collaboration  with  member  states 
and  stakeholders,  eventually  agreed  to  postpone  implementation  duties 
until the end of 1964—another deadline that was never kept (Galligan and 
Clavero 2012; Klein 2006).

The  most  important  structural  constraint  during  this  period  was  the 
obligatory unanimity25 vote in the Council for any kind of legislative acts. 
The pressure for implementation from the Commission towards member 
states and employers faded away with the so-called ‘empty chair crisis’ and 
social unrest in 1968 (Van der Vleuten 2007: 66f). Growing unemploy-
ment and social unrest helped to accelerate progress in social policy by the 
‘Paris mandate’ (1972) which initiated the first social action programme. 
The Commission used the broad frame to prompt significant legislative 
improvements regarding gender equality policy (Van der Vleuten 2007).

At best, the three main institutions could be characterised as promoting 

(a very limited understanding of) gender equality policy (cf. Fig. 1.1).

1.2.2 

  Directives for Working Women and the Rise of Social 

Europe

The second period from the mid-1970s until the early 1980s included the 
accession of Denmark, Ireland, the United Kingdom in 1973 and Greece 
in 1981. It brought in four countries whose economic situation was—with 
the exception of the UK—less favourable than in the EU founding mem-
ber states. In 1975 the EU set up the European Regional and Development 
Fund (ERDF) as a measure to combat the economic differences and as a 

 
30 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

MEMBER STATES

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

EUROPEAN COUNCIL

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

Fig. 1.1  Actors  in  EU  gender  equality  policy  during  the  first  period.  
Compilation by author

pay-back  negotiated  by  the  UK  for  not  profiting  from  the  Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) (Tsoukalis 1997).

During this period Article 119 provided the reference point for the first 
EU directives on equal pay for work of equal value26 in 1975, equal treat-
ment in the workplace27 in 1976, and equal treatment in social security28 
in 1979. The social security directive was supplemented by the occupa-
tional social security directive29 (adopted in 1986), which was delayed due 
to  severe  resistance  from  employer’s  organisations  (Ahrens  2002).  The 
Commission proposed a total of five directives in this period; a number 
that was never again achieved in gender equality policy in such a short 
time. Three of the directives were quickly adopted by the Council and had 
to be transposed and implemented by the member states (Epiney and Abt 
2003), while one was delayed. The fifth was a directive on parental leave, 
proposed by the Commission in 1983, before subsequently being post-
poned, renegotiated and only adopted in 1996. Despite the delays and the 
postponed parental leave directive, Ostner (1995: 176) rightfully coined 
this time span as ‘the golden age’ of the EU women’s policy due to the high 
number of directives which were proposed and adopted.

Legislation back then was the matter of the Commission (proposing) 
and the member states in the European Council (adopting), while the EP 
was excluded. Nonetheless, the directives led to a legislative framework 
that  often  exceeded  the  member  states’  status  quo  and  thereby  shaped 
national debates on gender equality. They led to considerable changes in 
the national legislation, even though implementation significantly varied 
between the member states (Berghahn and Wersig 2005; Hoskyns 1996; 
Ostner and Lewis 1998).

Along with the Commission and the Council, the European Court of 
Justice began to play a prominent role in gender equality policy, as many 
lawsuits regarding equal pay and women’s rights were submitted to the 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  31

ECJ.30 In 1975 the Belgian lawyer Eliane Vogel-Polsky brought the first 
successful lawsuit to the ECJ, Defrenne vs Sabena.31 The decision led to a 
direct application of Article 119 since 1962 (Van der Vleuten 2007:118). 
In the preliminary rulings the ECJ subsequently decided that Article 119 
was  directly  applicable.  It  immediately  supplemented  or  even  replaced 
national law in the case of inferior legislation (Cichowski 2001; Ellis 1998; 
Fredman 1992; Rossilli 1997). Over time the European Court of Justice 
developed a concept of direct and indirect discrimination,32 which eventu-
ally led to the revision of Article 119 to ‘equal pay for work of equal value’ 
(as  opposed  to  equal  pay  for  equal  work)  (Schunter-Kleemann  1994). 
This EU-induced change of national institutions in the area of social pol-
icy was exceptional. Hix even considered gender equality policy as the only 
policy domain where the EU had reached higher standards than the least 
common denominator (Hix 2005).

The  second  period  was  characterised  by  the  establishment  of  three 
important actors that still participated in gender equality policy when the 
Roadmap was adopted almost 30 years later. Inside the Commission the 
DG Employment set up an ‘Equal Opportunities Unit’ in 1976 with the 
task  of  guiding  and  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  directives 
(Ahrens 2002; Jacquot 2015). In the European Parliament female MEPs 
managed to set up an ‘Ad hoc Committee on Women’s Rights’ after the 
first direct elections in 1979—one of the only ad hoc committees in the 
EP that turned into a permanent committee (Corbett et al. 2011). Only 
two years later in 1981 the Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities 
for Women and Men33 was established as an interinstitutional body which 
consisted  of  Commission  officials  and  representatives  of  the  member 
states, Social Partners and women’s organisations (the latter as observers). 
At  the  member  states’  level  the  ‘Second-Wave  Women’s  Movement34’ 
pressed  for  equal  opportunities  and  organised  their  own  autonomous 
political spheres as counter-publics to the patriarchal state (Klein 2006).

The overall constellation of actors in the second period is illustrated in 

Fig. 1.2.

While the second phase started with legislation, the policy programmes 
and soft law measures for gender equality policy started to grow bit by bit. 
The  ESF  regulation  from  1977  included  measures  for  the  support  of 
women’s  employment  (Galligan  and  Clavero  2012),  even  though  the 
focus was narrowed down to employed women and did not take unpaid 
work  into  account.  It  revealed  a  clear  gender  bias  regarding  respective 
measures for men and women (Ahrens 2002).

 
32 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

DG Employment
& Social Affairs
Equal
Opportunities
Unit (1976) 

MEMBER STATES

EUROPEAN COUNCIL

Council Employment &
Social Affairs

SOCIAL PARTNERS

Advisory Committee on Equal
Opportunities for women and men
(1981)

ETUC (1973)

UNICE/BUSINESSEUROPE (1949)

UEAPME (1979)

CEEP (1961)

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

EUROPEAN COURT OF
JUSTICE

Fig.  1.2  Actors  in  EU  gender  equality  policy  during  the  second  period.  
Compilation by author. The bracketed years indicate the year of establishment

At the end of this period the first ‘Community action programme on 
the promotion of equal opportunities for women (1982–85)’35 was pro-
posed and adopted with the main aim of monitoring the implementation 
of the guidelines in the member states, as well as developing new legisla-
tive proposals regarding gender equality. The results will be discussed fur-
ther below.

In summary, the second period comprised a focus on legislation and—
together with the ESF, the EFRE and the first action programme—paved 
the way for the rise of social Europe. The development came to a halt dur-
ing the third phase when member states were unwilling to commit to new 
and  often  costly  legislation  (Ahrens  and  Van  der  Vleuten  2017).  The 
involvement of the ECJ and the formation of new actors that essentially 
steered EU gender equality policy from then on revealed the interplay of 
actors and structure at an early stage.

1.2.3 

  Turning to Equal Opportunities Policy Programmes 

and the Common Market

The third period covers the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s and began with 
the member states’ agreement on the Single European Act (SEA) in 1985. 
The SEA introduced qualified majority voting as a decision-making proce-
dure in policy areas which were related to the completion of the internal 
market, preferably by eliminating taxes and tolls among member states. At 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  33

the same time Spain and Portugal entered the EU in 1986, adding two 
more economically weak states to the group (Galligan and Clavero 2012). 
Finally, the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the collapse of socialist or com-
munist regimes in Central and Eastern Europe and German unification 
changed the overall context of the European Union. This led to substan-
tial changes to the original treaties by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992.

During  the  third  period  gender  equality  policy  developed  in  an 
entirely different way to the previous periods. Substantial legislative pro-
posals  were  weakened,  postponed  or  turned  into  ineffective  soft  law, 
 recommendations and resolutions. Only the self-employment directive36 
was reluctantly adopted (Van der Vleuten 2007:137), based on Article 
119. The directive was developed in the context of the first action pro-
gramme (1982–1985) (Ahrens 2002). In 1992 a directive on pregnant 
workers and women who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding37 
was eventually adopted, following years of struggles between the Council 
and the Commission. Interestingly, the struggle was resolved by defin-
ing pregnancy as sickness and adopting the directive in the area of health 
and  safety  at  work  (which  fell  under  majority  voting  in  the  Council), 
rather than in the area of employment (which had unanimity voting back 
then) (Ostner and Lewis 1998: 202). This was the first directive in gen-
der equality policy that was adopted with limited (in this case, unsuc-
cessful) participation of the EP via the so-called cooperation procedure38 
(Van der Vleuten 2007: 156f).

Other  Commission  proposals  for  directives  were  often  turned  into 
much less potent recommendations and resolutions, because the member 
states did not find common ground or were ideologically opposed (Ahrens 
2002). Topics included equal participation in decision-making processes, 
positive  actions,  vocational  training  for  women  and  childcare  facilities. 
However,  some  researchers  suggest  that  the  European  equal  treatment 
legislation  has  still  been  one  of  the  best-developed  parts  of  European 
social integration (Rust 2005), even though it took a back seat to eco-
nomic  integration  (Liebert  2003).  The  Maastricht  Treaty  finally  intro-
duced  the  so-called  ‘Social  Dialogue’  as  a  new  legislative  procedure  by 
providing the Social Partners (trade unions and employer’s organisations) 
with the right to agree on directives, which could then be adopted by the 
Council under certain circumstances.

The  1989  ECJ  ‘Achterberg  decision’39  (welcomed  by  many  member 
states) caused a narrow focus of Article 119 to women in the labour market 
and weakened political chances to further exploit the legislative possibilities. 

34 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Meanwhile the ECJ confirmed the direct applicability of Article 119 and its 
definition of direct and indirect discrimination, which led to almost 50 cases 
between 1971 and 1996 (Klein 2006: 74) and the ECJ becoming one of the 
most  important  gender  equality  actors.40  The  Commission  more  or  less 
stopped  proposing  directives  and  eventually  relied  on  running  policy  pro-
grammes as the central policy-making measure in EU gender equality policy.
The ‘Equal opportunities for women. Medium-term Community pro-
gramme 1986–90’41 centred on developing compensatory policies through 
positive  action.  This  meant  that  policies  often  did  not  aim  to  prevent 
inequality in the labour market, but simply tried to attenuate disadvan-
tages  for  a  limited  group,  like  women  who  already  participated  in  the 
labour  market.  In  terms  of  innovative  outcomes  the  action  programme 
supported the qualification of women in information and communication 
technologies (ICT) in order to reduce horizontal segregation, as well as 
projects  to  facilitate  the  reconciliation  of  work  and  private  life  (Ahrens 
2002). Last but not least, the action programme gave birth to the largest 
umbrella organisation of national women’s organisations in Europe, the 
European Women’s Lobby (EWL).

In the ‘Third medium-term Community action programme on equal 
opportunities  for  women  and  men  (1991–95)’,42  the  Commission 
extended the previous scope to topics, such as women in decision-making, 
the equal participation of women in economic and social life, and lifelong 
learning as proposed in the SEA and later in the Maastricht social protocol 
(Rees 1998). In addition, the Commission set up the trans-national pro-
gramme  ‘New  Opportunities  for  Women’  (NOW)  within  the  ESF.  It 
made gender equality policy more visible, although its narrow focus on 
women  returning  to  the  labour  market  attracted  criticism  (Schunter- 
Kleemann 1999).

Action programmes were used to push forward gender equality issues 
during times when the Council43 lacked the political will to do so (Hoskyns 
1996; Mazey 1998). The action programmes included topics related (but 
not  limited  to)  the  labour  market,  thereby  functioning  as  a  tool  to 
broaden the scope of the gender equality policy area in terms of legisla-
tion and content. The Commission often collaborated with the Women’s 
Rights Committee44 in the European Parliament, whereby both aimed to 
get the most out of the narrow legal possibilities by introducing innova-
tive measures and legislative proposals with each new action programme 
(Hoskyns 2000).

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  35

MEMBER STATES

EUROPEAN COUNCIL

Council Employment &
Social Affairs

Informal Council Equal
Opportunities (1989) 

SOCIAL PARTNERS

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

DG Personnel &
Administration

DG Employment
& Social Affairs
Equal
Opportunities
Unit (1976) 

LOBBY GROUPS

WIDE (1985)

EWL (1990)

WAVE (1994)

Advisory Committee on Equal
Opportunities for women and men
(1981)

ETUC (1973)

UNICE/BUSINESSEUROPE (1949)

UEAPME (1979)

CEEP (1961)

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

Committee Women’s Rights
FEMM (1984) 

EUROPEAN COURT OF
JUSTICE

Fig.  1.3  Actors  in  EU  gender  equality  policy  during  the  third  period.  
Compilation by author. The bracketed years indicate the year of establishment

During this period the member states proved to be a constant obstacle 
in the Council by refusing the Commission proposals in the area of gender 
equality. At the same time the equal opportunities Unit of DG Employment, 
the FEMM committee and the EWL emerged as an actor’s network that 
closely collaborated on a supranational level and demonstrated effective-
ness in developing new and innovative paths for gender equality policy via 
action programmes (cf. Fig. 1.3).

The  Commission  started  using  social  movements  to  legitimise  its 
work  and  gather  information  about  specific  issues  (Mazey  and 
Richardson 2006). This process coincided with the Commission’s cre-
ation  of  a  specific  self-selection  process  for  national  women’s  move-
ments by inviting conventional lobbying and neglecting other forms of 
social  movement  action,  such  as  contentious  and  disruptive  actions 
(Marks and McAdam 1999). Nevertheless, the way in which civil society 
collaborated with the Commission and managed to deepen EU integra-
tion in this policy area was unique (Greenwood 2007). It even led to 
new legislation involving innovative policy issues over quite a long time. 
According to Mazey (2012) the collaboration between the Commission 

36 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

and women’s movements has been efficient in widening the policy area, 
even though the success depended more on the implementation of hard 
rather than soft law.

Less efficient was the spread of resources in favour of gender equality 
and  development  of  gender  expertise  within  other  Commission  DGs. 
Staudt and Jacquette (1988) examined policy programmes and concluded 
that, apart from legal obligations, laws and policies at all levels and the 
redistribution of resources and values failed. One of the main reasons was 
the  bureaucratic  resistance  to  redistributive  and  conflictual  issues: 
‘Apparent victories are often caught up in a bureaucratic mire of inaction, 
avoidance  and  distortion  …  programs  to  enhance  women’s  economic 
 integration and redistribute opportunities and resources by gender pose a spe-
cial  threat  to  male  bureaucratic  decision  makers,  a  threat  which  they  can 
easily  identify  and  stymie  in  myriad  ways’  (Staudt  and  Jacquette  1988: 
263–264).

Not  only  did  the  actors  and  activities  change  during  this  time;  the 
content  changed  as  well.  While  the  second  period  concentrated  on 
women as a deficient group of workers who needed to adjust to a male 
norm,  the  third  period  focused  on  disadvantaged  women  who  needed 
different support than men (Ahrens 2002). The scope of the action pro-
grammes also changed in a similar way. While the first action programme 
was  entitled  ‘promotion  of  equal  opportunities  for  women’  (author’s 
emphasis) and focused almost exclusively on legislative compliance, the 
two action programmes of the third period changed the title to ‘equal 
opportunities for women and men’ (author’s emphasis) which particu-
larly embraced positive action measures and addressed the influence of 
reproductive responsibilities of women. The third action programme dis-
cussed  equal  opportunity  policy  as  a  crucial  element  of  economic  and 
structural policies (Hoskyns 2000; Rees 1998).

The  implementation  of  the  SEA  eventually  led  to  the  Treaty  of 
Maastricht in 1992, which is most commonly known as the treaty for set-
ting up the European Union.45 The Treaty of Maastricht regulated the 
institutional structures and competencies regarding responsibilities of the 
three main EU institutions (Commission, Council, EP) in a new way. It 
created a specific kind of EU polity.46 Women’s movements and gender 
experts had to translate their goals and approaches into the ‘rational’ lan-
guage of the state as a precondition for enforcing gender mainstreaming 
(Woodward 1999).

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  37

1.2.4 

  Adopting Gender Mainstreaming and the Return 

to Social Policies

The  fourth  period  covered  the  mid-1990s  to  approximately  2004  and 
brought  several  fundamental  changes  to  the  EU,  particularly  for  actors 
and structure. In terms of actors, the beginning was marked by the enlarge-
ment to the North,47 while the end was marked by the enlargement to 
Central and Eastern Europe.48 In terms of structural changes, the begin-
ning was marked by the Treaty of Amsterdam and the end by the debate 
on the ‘Draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe’ and the intro-
duction of the Euro. These fundamental changes also had a severe impact 
on  EU  gender  equality  policy,  bringing  remarkable  progress  in  many 
regards.  The  actors’  collaboration  from  the  previous  period  intensified 
during this time and many new actors were established by 2004.

The  possibilities  for  the  Commission  to  extend  the  scope  of  gender 
equality policy has changed considerably since the mid-1990s due to two 
developments. First, the enlargement to the North and the prior period 
made  clear  that  Sweden  and  Finland  as  new  member  states  strongly 
favoured a well-developed gender equality policy and were also willing to 
negotiate it as an important element of the accession agenda (Galligan and 
Clavero 2012). Second, on a global scale the Fourth UN International 
Conference on Women49 in Beijing in 1995 and its predecessors supported 
introducing step-by-step gender mainstreaming as a new political strategy. 
As one of the forerunners and supporters the EU adopted a description of 
gender mainstreaming in Article 3(2) of the Treaty of Amsterdam (1997).50 
The adoption of the two articles was not least the result of coordinated 
lobbying by the European Women’s Lobby and the FEMM committee 
(Helfferich and Kolb 2001).

The Treaty of Amsterdam was broadly perceived as a milestone for gen-
der equality policy (Fuhrmann 2005; Walby 2005; Wobbe and Biermann 
2009),  because  it  introduced  new  articles  or  changed  existing  ones.  It 
thereby opened up new possibilities for political action by the European 
Commission. Equality between men and women was added to Article 251 
of the treaty and became an official policy area equal to other tasks, such 
as a high level of employment, a high degree of competitiveness or eco-
nomic and social cohesion and solidarity among member states.

The EU also stipulated that impacts on gender equality must be taken 
into account in every policy area according to article 3(2) (EC). This was 
largely  interpreted  as  the  legal  basis  for  the  gender  mainstreaming 

 
38 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

strategy.52 Gender mainstreaming relies on certain premises that brought 
important changes to gender equality policy and its relationship to politics 
in general.53 Gender mainstreaming can contribute to changing the per-
spective from women as deficient and requiring an adjustment to a white, 
heterosexual  male  norm  towards  transforming  societal  structures  that 
reproduce gender inequalities. This transformative approach—by focus-
ing  on  the  structural  reasons  for  gendered  inequalities  and  aiming  to 
change exactly these structures—is an approach which enables actors to 
recognise gendered inequalities in real life and change the structural basics 
in order to promote and eventually reach gender equality54 (Rees 1998; 
Woodward 2001).

Even though gender mainstreaming focuses on structural changes, this 
approach does not exclude positive actions as tools for accelerating changes. 
The actors’ involvement in supporting gender expertise is crucial, as is the 
involvement of actors who are normally involved in policy- making. Since 
gender  mainstreaming  aims  to  change  structures,  the  commitment  of 
actors at all governance levels is predicted as essential, although actors have 
to perform different roles depending on their responsibilities (Ahrens and 
Geppert 2005; Ahrens and Lewalter 2005). The basic idea of gender main-
streaming was best summarised in the definition of the Group of Specialists 
on mainstreaming in their final report to the Council of Europe in 199955:

Gender  mainstreaming  is  the  (re)organisation,  improvement,  development 
and evaluation of policy processes, so that a gender equality perspective is incor-
porated  in  all  policies  at  all  levels  and  at  all  stages,  by  the  actors  normally 
involved in policy-making.

In reality, however, gender mainstreaming has so far very rarely been 
the transformative force as it was once designed. Integrationist, co- optative 
or  toolkit  approaches  have  become  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception 
(Lombardo et al. 2013; Stratigaki 2004, 2005; Walby 2005). As Fiona 
Beveridge (2007: 195) critically noted:

Gender  mainstreaming  essentially  posits  that  gender  should  be  taken  into 
account by policy-makers at all stages of the political and policy-making process; 
however, it is capable of many different interpretations and expectations across 
a  broad  spectrum—it  can  be  viewed  as  anything  from  a  technical  pool  for 
policy- makers  devoid  of  substantive/normative  content  to  an  instrument  of 
governance or democratisation.

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  39

MEMBER STATES

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

EUROPEAN COUNCIL

Helsinki Group (1999)

Council Employment &
Social Affairs

Informal Council Equal
Opportunities (1989) 

EG Gender Equality in Development
Cooperation (1999)

WES Network (2000)

High Level Group GM (2001)

High Level Group GM in
Structural Funds (2004)

Advisory Committee on Equal
Opportunities for women and men
(1981)

SOCIAL PARTNERS

ETUC (1973)

UNICE/BUSINESSEUROPE (1949)

UEAPME (1979)

CEEP (1961)

DG Employment
& Social Affairs
Equality:
Legal Questions
(2004)

Equal
Opportunities
Unit (1976)

Inter-Service-
Group on
Gender Equality
(1996)

DG Personnel &
Administration

Group of
Commissioners on
Fundamental Rights,
Anti-discrimination
and Equal
Opportunities (1995)

LOBBY GROUPS

WIDE (1985)

EWL (1990)

EWLA (2000)

WAVE (1994)

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

Committee Women’s Rights and
Gender Equality FEMM (1984) 

EUROPEAN COURT OF
JUSTICE

(SCIENTIFIC) NETWORKS
Advisory Committee on women
and rural areas (1998)

EGGSIE
(1998)

EG on Trafficking in Human Beings (2003)

Fig.  1.4  Actors  in  EU  gender  equality  policy  during  the  fourth  period.  
Compilation by author. The bracketed years indicate the year of establishment

In terms of the gender mainstreaming article, the Treaty of Amsterdam 
required to improve equality between women and men in any appropriate 
policy area. The article caused an immense expansion of the legal scope 
and led to various internal and external activities by all EU institutions 
(Fuhrmann 2005; Schmidt 2001). In particular, the Commission created 
special bodies which were responsible for gender equality, many of them 
worked  in  collaboration  with  member  states  (cf.  Fig.  1.4).  Inside  the 
Commission the Group of Commissioners on Equal Opportunities56 indi-
cated  a  high  level  commitment  to  gender  equality,  while  the  newly 
 established  interservice  group  on  gender  equality  (then  chaired  by  the 
Unit G1 ‘Equality between Women and Men’57) represented the working 
level by bringing together Commission officials in charge of gender equal-
ity in the DGs.

All  major  EU  institutions  subsequently  adopted  resolutions  on  the 
implementation  of  gender  mainstreaming.  These  ‘codes  of  conduct’ 

40 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

introduced new topics to gender equality policy, such as promoting gen-
der equality in external relations and gender and public health. Gender 
mainstreaming was coined as the ‘dual approach’ and was understood to 
pursue  the  implementation  of  the  gender  mainstreaming  strategy  while 
still supporting positive actions for women. According to Jacquot (2010: 
127)  ‘the  softness  of  gender  mainstreaming  has  facilitated  a  process  of 
diversification’.

Further changes in primary law included two crucial changes to Article 
119 (from then on 141): first, extending equal pay to work of equal value; 
and second, explicitly allowing positive action measures in favour of the 
underrepresented  sex  (Paragraph  4).58  The  parliamentary  FEMM 
Committee with the EWL once again proved successful in lobbying for 
stronger treaty articles (Klein 2006; Van der Vleuten 2007). Article 1359 
on combating discrimination was also added, placing gender next to other 
grounds  of  discrimination  and  extending  the  promotion  of  equality  to 
areas other than employment. Subsequently, the lobbying activities of a 
broad range of NGOs met fruitful ground on the supranational level.60 
Anti-discrimination directives were adopted in ‘world record’ time, despite 
the  fundamentally  different  policies  in  the  member  states  (Geddes  and 
Guiraudon 2004).

This period of gender equality policy was generally characterised by a 
revival of legislation in hard and soft law. Contrary to the previous periods, 
legislation did not necessarily rely on a unanimous vote in the Council. 
The parental leave directive61 (1996) and the part-time directive62 (1997) 
were agreed in the social dialogue and fell under qualified majority voting 
in the Council. The directive on the burden of proof63 was adopted by 
qualified majority voting in 1997. The EP’s limited influence (via the so- 
called  cooperation  procedure)  was  too  powerless  to  enforce  its  amend-
ments,  which  would  have  considerably  widened  the  scope  (Wobbe  and 
Biermann 2009).

After the introduction of the Treaty of Amsterdam the Equal Treatment 
Directive  from  1976  was  considerably  revised  in  2002  as  the  so-called 
‘Gender  Equality  Directive’.64  It  was  also  the  first  directive  in  gender 
equality policy that fell under the co-decision procedure, thereby putting 
the Council and the EP almost at the same legislative level. Article 1365 
(combating  discrimination)  was  subject  to  unanimous  voting  in  the 
Council and placed the EP in an advisory position. In the consultation 
process  the  Directive  on  Equal  Treatment  in  the  Access  and  Supply  of 
Goods and Services66 (2004) was adopted. The EP and NGOs lobbied for 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  41

an inclusion of media, advertising and taxation in the directive, but could 
not force the majority of reluctant member states (in particular the UK 
and Germany) to agree on a broader scope in the rule of unanimous vot-
ing (Van der Vleuten 2007: 163f).

The legal obligation of gender mainstreaming signified the latest period 
of EU gender equality policy legislation to date. In 2002 the ‘European 
Convent’ (established by the ‘Laeken Declaration’ in 2001) started working 
on a ‘Draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe’. Right from the 
beginning the low representation of women in the Convent generated criti-
cal voices and the first draft resulted in severe protests and the  mobilisation 
of  women  and  women’s  movements  in  all  member  states,  as  it  fell  back 
behind  the  existing  gender  equality  legislation.  The  male-dominated 
Convent  ‘forgot’  about  women’s  rights  (Klein  2006;  Lombardo  2005; 
Shaw 2005).

The  policy  programmes  on  gender  equality  continued  and  gender 
equality, in particular the obligation for gender mainstreaming, was firmly 
embedded in many other programmes, such as the regulations for the ESF 
and  the  ERDF,  DAPHNE  and  soft  law  measures,  such  as  the  Open 
Method of Coordination (OMC).

With  the  European  Employment  Strategy  (EES)  the  EU  introduced 
the  so-called  Open  Method  of  Coordination  (OMC67).  It  eventually 
became one of the most common soft law decision-making procedures for 
EU labour market policies and subsequently for many other policy areas.68 
In the EES gender equality was connected with efficiency concerns and 
subjugated  to  the  overall  goals  of  the  employment  policy  process 
(Beveridge 2007; Fredman 2006; Rubery 2002). Despite its shortcom-
ings the EES also favoured a dual breadwinner model69 and added new 
aspects to the political debate on gender equality in many countries. The 
subjugation  of  gender  aspects  to  economic  policies  (rather  than  their 
transformation) affirmed the impression that the EU once again turned to 
an economic model that solely favoured the individualisation of economic 
and social rights, regardless of sex and the specific living conditions. The 
gender dimension of the EES deteriorated over time after it had once been 
one of four pillars and before it was reduced to one element in the Preamble 
and  only  constituted  a  part  of  one  Guideline  (out  of  18)  by  2005 
(O’Connor 2008; Wöhl 2008; Smith and Villa 2010).

Gender mainstreaming became the leading theme in the fourth gender 
equality policy programme, the ‘Fourth medium-term Community action 
programme on equal opportunities for men and women (1996–2000)’.70 

42 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

The goal of the action programme was to support supranational measures 
in regard to the reconciliation of work, family and private life, women in 
decision-making, implementing gender mainstreaming in the EU struc-
tural  funds  and  monitoring  implementation  in  the  member  states  (van 
Doorne-Huiskes 1997). In addition, best practice exchange was empha-
sised, particularly regarding member state research. Through this action 
programme  the  member  states  were  first  obliged  to  report  to  the 
Commission about progress; reports that were subsequently compiled as 
the  annual  ‘Report  on  Equality  between  Women  and  Men’71  (Ahrens 
2002).

Even before gender mainstreaming became well-known in these policy 
programmes,  ‘equal  opportunities  for  women  and  men’  by  means  of 
mainstreaming gender were included as a target in the structural funds 
regulation  of  1993.  Thus  gender  mainstreaming  has  been  firmly  estab-
lished in the structural funds regulations for a long time.72

The last action programme of this period, the ‘Programme relating to 
the Community framework strategy on gender equality (2001–2005)’73 
brought a comprehensive renewal. The policy programme comprised an 
integrated  approach  and  consisted  of  the  usual  (operative)  action  pro-
gramme (cf. above) and the ‘Community framework strategy on gender 
equality’.74 It provided the broader framework and statement for all EU’s 
gender  equality  policy.  The  extension  demonstrated  a  fundamental 
change  and  improvement  compared  to  the  previous  programmes.  The 
goal that resorted to gender mainstreaming was to transform structures 
and  promote  gender  equality  effectively  inside  and  outside  the 
Commission.

The areas of intervention of both policy programmes went far beyond 
employment policies and the strategy explicitly stressed the aim of com-
batting gender inequalities beyond the labour market. The strategy also 
strongly framed gender equality as a question of democracy for the first 
time; a question ‘of all citizens women and men alike to participate and be 
represented equally in the economy, in decision-making, and in social, cul-
tural and civil life’.75 The Commission first used the strategy to develop 
indicators,  benchmarks  and  to  monitor  mechanisms  and  policy 
networks.

During this period various new interinstitutional76 networks and expert 
groups were established at a supranational level, as illustrated in detail in 
Fig.  1.4.  Most  of  the  supranational  networks  comprised  representatives 
from national administrations, e.g. the ‘European Network to Promote 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  43

Women’s  Entrepreneurship  (WES)’,  the  ‘Group  of  Experts  on  Gender 
Equality in development cooperation’ and the ‘Helsinki Group’. Others 
were explicitly established as scientific expert groups, such as the ‘Advisory 
Committee on women and rural areas’ and the ‘Expert Group on Gender 
and  Social  Inclusion  (EGGSIE)’.  The  overview  reveals  that  the  policy 
areas  went  far  beyond  employment  policies,  thereby  implementing  the 
goals of the strategy and the connected action programme. At the same 
time supranational lobby groups, such as ‘Women in Development Europe 
(WIDE)’  or  ‘Women  Against  Violence  Europe  (WAVE)’,  firmly  placed 
themselves in the policy area of gender equality.

During this period the Council established no new formations that for-
mally listed gender equality in their title. Gender equality policy was still 
subsumed under the Council on Employment and Social Affairs and meet-
ings  of  the  ministers  responsible  for  gender  equality  took  place  infor-
mally.77  As  one  of  the  most  important  gender  equality  actors  of  the 
previous periods, the ECJ was put in the background (Jacquot 2010).

In summary, the EU’s gender equality policy was extended in a manner 
previously  unheard  of,  particularly  in  respect  of  the  number  of  actors 
(Ahrens 2008). The broadening of the scope can be traced back to the 
formal adoption of the gender mainstreaming strategy at a supranational 
level. Gender mainstreaming was introduced by an effective lobbying pol-
icy network, a policy network that Alison Woodward (2004) coined as the 
‘velvet  triangle’.  Women’s  movements  and  femocrats  became  the  main 
agents  of  change  who  pushed  for  women’s  rights.  They  were  relatively 
successful in placing multifaceted questions of equality on the agenda of 
international regimes (Rai 2003).

Subsequently,  gender  equality  was  no  longer  limited  to  employment 
policies,  but  rather  included  issues,  such  as  combating  violence  against 
women, overcoming gender stereotypes in media and education, the equal 
representation and participation of women in economic, social, scientific 
and political life and promoting gender equality in external relations. By 
the end of this period the number of actors who were in charge of gender 
equality policy and participated in this policy area had almost doubled in 
less than a decade. The content of the policy area was broadened by gen-
der mainstreaming and the introduction of anti-discrimination legislation. 
The extension particularly shaped the current period of EU gender equal-
ity  policy  and  led  to  the  criticism  that  ‘equality’  mainstreaming  would 
subsequently  replace  gender  mainstreaming,  thereby  rendering  gender 
equality policy hollow (Woodward 2012).

44 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

1.2.5 

  Retaining the Dual Approach in Times of Crisis

Since 2005 gender equality policy has changed due to the first and subse-
quent enlargements78 to Central and Eastern Europe, the crucial treaty 
revisions of Lisbon and the deep economic and political crisis in the EU 
since 2008. The EU itself has no longer been a tool for exerting pressure 
upon its member states; it has rather become a state-like actor that needs 
to  be  influenced.  Whereas  the  impacts  of  the  latest  changes  on  gender 
equality  policy  are  not  predictable,  ambiguous  developments  can  be 
detected. For example, the concept of intersectionality has generally been 
seen as a necessary widening of the sometimes limited understanding of 
‘gender’ (Lombardo and Verloo 2009; Rolandsen Agustín 2013; Walby 
2009). At the same time the ‘silent’ fellow called ‘equality mainstreaming’ 
caused  an  equivalent  rejection  due  to  its  threat  to  the  special  status  of 
gender equality (Mazey 2001; Squires 2005; Woodward 2008).

During this period the understanding of gender equality was concur-
ring or diametrically opposed in terms of inclusion vs. sameness, difference 
vs. reversal, displacement vs. transformation (Fraser and Honneth 2005; 
Squires 1999; Walby 2005). Jane Jenson (2008) pointed to the problem-
atic tendency of ‘writing women out, folding gender in’. This shifts the 
focus from existing gender inequalities to a supply-side understanding of 
social  policy,  a  trajectory  labelled  by  Jenson  (2008)  as  ‘LEGO  policy 
paradigm’.

With the enlargement to Eastern and Central Europe in 2004 the EU 
faced two changes regarding gender equality policy. First, the former com-
munist and socialist states had to adopt the ‘acquis communautaire’ prior 
to accession, thereby facing prescriptions regarding gender equality policy. 
The edited volume by Roth (2008) showed that the EU failed miserably 
in rigorously implementing gender equality legislation, as many member 
states considerably lacked basic provisions in this policy area. Second, with 
the enlargement in 2004, states that had just undergone a major transition 
entered the EU with their very own history of gender regime (Bretherton 
2001; Watson 2000). The states in transition back then supported and 
developed  a  successful  gender  regime  for  decades  that  favoured  equal 
rights from above. However, the gender-specific division of work remained 
uncontested, leaving reproductive and unpaid work to women (Kolinsky 
and  Nickel  2003).  Despite  gender  equality  policy  not  having  played  a 
large role in the accession period itself, there have been more similarities 
than  differences  between  the  ‘old’  and  ‘new’  member  states  regarding 

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  45

gender equality policy. Challenges to women’s policy agencies and a weak 
implementation of legislation and gender mainstreaming seemed to be the 
rule and not the exception.

The Treaty of Amsterdam obliged the entire Commission and all of its 
DGs and services to implement gender mainstreaming. After almost ten 
years  the  level  of  activities  still  differed  significantly  between  DGs  and 
gender mainstreaming even weakened the original institutional structure 
(Jacquot  2015).  In  2006  only  a  few  DGs  had  more  than  one  person 
responsible for gender mainstreaming. DG Employment and DG Research 
were the only departments with full units which were responsible for gen-
der equality, while some DGs had assigned the task to the portfolio of one 
civil servant only. The majority of DGs did not display the responsibility 
for gender equality within their organisational chart as a task for one (or 
more) of their civil servants, despite the fact that all DGs officially partici-
pated in the Commission interservice group on gender equality. The pic-
ture has not changed. A range of scholars have attested that the EU lacked 
any  clear  and  coherent  vision  of  what  gender  equality  might  look  like. 
Gender mainstreaming became an empty signifier (Beveridge and Velluti 
2008;  Lombardo  and  Meier  2008;  Verloo  2005).  Gender  equality  was 
framed differently in the EU member states and at the supranational level 
itself (Verloo 2007). How gender equality policy evolved depended sig-
nificantly  on  the  (national)  context  and  the  ideas  transported  by  actors 
(Kantola 2006).

The legislative scope of gender equality remained stable and the strug-
gles of the constitutional debate calmed down when the draft constitution 
was refashioned as the Treaty of Lisbon in 2007. However, the text of the 
articles  remained  the  same  (despite  being  renumbered).  In  2006  four 
older directives79 were merged into the so-called recast directive, while the 
parental leave directive was revised in 2010. In late 2012 Commissioner 
Viviane Reding revived gender equality legislation with a proposal for a 
directive on gender quotas in boards80—a big bang that caused uproar in 
the Council. Many member states threatened their immediate refusal.

After years of struggle the Council and the EP agreed to establish a 
European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) in Vilnius, Lithuania in 
2006.  It  started  working  in  2010  (Ahrens  and  Lewalter  2006).  In  the 
same year the new Commission allowed the responsibilities for coordinat-
ing  gender  equality  policy  to  be  moved  from  DG  Employment  to  DG 
Justice on the political and administrative level. This major change resulted 
in a loss of expertise and broken network ties, in particular for civil society 

46 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

and the FEMM Committee, as well as in a change of the policy from anti- 
discrimination to employment (Van der Vleuten 2012).

Changes  to  actor  constellations  and  their  role  for  EU  integration 
occurred on a broader level. In 2010 the Lisbon Strategy was updated as 
the  Europe  2020  Strategy  with  the  central  aim  of  promoting  a  ‘smart, 
sustainable  and  inclusive  economy’.  Europe  2020  is  coordinated  in  the 
same manner as the OMC and monitors—without any possibility for sanc-
tions—the economic and social reforms of member states. Jacquot argued 
gender  equality  has  disappeared  almost  entirely  from  Europe  2020. 
Objectives and even employment indicators do not include any reference 
to gender, but only to neutral adult workers (2015: 154). As a result the 
Commission has lost the opportunity to include gender (in)equalities in 
its evaluation of national policies and recommendations for member states 
(Klatzer and Schlager 2014) and the EP and the ECJ are excluded from 
the process (Jacquot 2015).

Gender equality did, however, enter policy areas like research (Cavaghan 
2012), development and external relations (Van der Vleuten et al. 2014), 
as well as human rights policy, fighting human trafficking and combating 
violence (Rolandsen Agustín 2013). This also led to new networks which 
were once more instigated by the European Commission. Through the 
policy programme DAPHNE the EU enabled and supported the creation 
of policy networks (Montoya 2008, 2009).

Two  distinct  gender  equality  policy  programmes  have  been  adopted 
since  2005,  the  ‘Roadmap  for  equality  between  women  and  men 
2006–2010’81  and  the  ‘Strategy  for  equality  between  women  and  men 
2010–2015’.82  The  latest  ‘Strategic  engagement  for  gender  equality 
2016–2019’ in the form of a Commission staff working document does 
not  qualify  as  EU  soft  law  any  more.  The  adoption  of  the  2010–2015 
strategy was accompanied by the publication of the ‘Women’s charter’, the 
first  official  document  in  gender  equality  policy  published  by  the 
Commission  since  the  adoption  of  gender  mainstreaming  that  did  not 
even mention the term gender mainstreaming.

The Roadmap already signalled a severe deterioration compared to the 
previous gender equality policy programmes. Contrary to the usual compo-
sition of EU documents, the Roadmap’s introduction made no reference to 
legal obligations to promote gender equality; indeed, neither the Treaty of 
Amsterdam nor the Beijing Platform for Action83 was stated as the legal 
framework. The missing legal references triggered the impression that pro-
moting gender equality was voluntary as opposed to a treaty obligation.

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  47

The  Roadmap  was  the  first  ever  gender  equality  policy  programme 
without its own action programme and—even more importantly—with-
out a clearly defined budget. Different Community programmes, such as 
PROGRESS or DAPHNE or the structural funds, were to provide neces-
sary resources. In 2008 the specific gender branch in PROGRESS only 
amounted to nine per cent while the original budget intended for gender 
equality was twelve per cent. The missing three percentage points were 
spent on the other policy areas and this loss was irreversible, as the 2012 
analysis  of  the  PROGRESS  implementation  revealed.  Even  though  the 
planned share of commitments for gender equality had been raised above 
13 percent since 2011, the actual expenditure was alarmingly low. The gap 
between  plans  and  actual  expenditure  almost  only  occurred  for  gender 
equality (European Commission 2013: 66).

The Roadmap was also the first gender equality policy programme that 
did  not  provide  for  any  new  legislative  proposals  and—more  impor-
tantly—any  actions  with  direct  involvement  of  member  states  or  Social 
Partners. The title of the Roadmap switched from ‘gender equality’ (in the 
framework strategy) to ‘equality between women and men’.

While  some  of  the  action  areas  of  the  framework  strategy  and  the 
Roadmap looked similar, it is crucial to note that the Roadmap reduced 
the  broader  social  justice  claims  to  equal  economic  independence.  The 
Roadmap’s priority areas of action covered Commission activities only. A 
core  element  of  previous  programmes—the  collaboration  with  member 
states, women’s organisations and/or trade unions in trans-national proj-
ects—was abandoned. A new section in the Roadmap on promoting gen-
der  equality  in  external  and  development  policies  revealed  the  shift  in 
focus on exporting the EU gender regime instead of tackling remaining 
gender gaps in the EU more efficiently (Ahrens 2008).

The last policy programme, the ‘Strategy for equality between women 
and men 2010–2015’,84 continued the retrenchment: the policy issues stag-
nated and described the situation of women and men without even men-
tioning the different impact of the financial and economic crisis on women’s 
and men’s economic and employment situation (Karamessini and Rubery 
2013). The move from DG Employment to DG Justice in 2010 was cer-
tainly one of the factors that contributed to the deterioration of the policy.
In summary, EU gender equality policy consists of three different, yet 
overlapping  elements:  legislation,  policy  programmes  and  gender  main-
streaming. They developed over time in the order listed. The three labels are 
also distinctive and characteristic for different time periods, as specified in 

48 
 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

detail above. The rather astonishing insight from reviewing historical paths 
was that—apart from all the changes—there was also enormous stability.

1.2.6 

  Organisation of the Book

During the last decades the EU made an important step by changing the 
dominant unanimity, harmonisation and regulation to a decision-making 
procedure that is more oriented towards mutual recognition, deregulation 
and qualified majority voting (Schmitter 1996). This turn has prompted 
changes in the way of policy-making. ‘Another way of putting it is that the 
EC/EU may have no strategic design, but will emerge in an improvised 
fashion  from  tactical  responses  to  much  more  concrete  and  immediate 
problems’  (Schmitter  1996:  2).  The  improvised  fashion  of  EU  policy- 
making requires studying case studies to contextualise the policy area logic 
within the broader logic of EU integration. By employing a sociological 
approach  the  study  shares  the  idea  of  European  sociology  that  ‘studies 
should concentrate primarily on actors’ attitudes rather than on institu-
tional structures’ (Saurugger 2014: 163).

One notable aspect when talking about gender equality policy is that 
the divisions have always been along ideological and normative grounds 
and less in relation to the national interests of member states. This means 
that gender equality was (and remains) a policy area where the basic condi-
tions  differ  considerably  from  most  other  EU  policy  areas.  The  latest 
retrenchment of gender equality policy programmes finds its reflection in 
the  policy-making  processes  leading  to  the  Roadmap.  This  book  high-
lights the difficulties of the changes and the unintended consequences in 
the  Roadmap  process.  The  book  also  helps  to  understand  the  possible 
consequences of the new ‘strategy’ by illuminating how major changes to 
the content of gender equality policy and its actors emerged.

The  in-depth,  actor-centred  sociological  case  study  of  the  internal 
policy- making processes that produce EU gender equality policy answers 
three different, yet connected questions in the empirical chapters:

•  Who participates in soft law gender equality policy-making over the 

course of time?

•  What role does the development of policy areas play in how actors 

interpret and reconstruct the policy process?

•  How did different actors link the policy implications of the policy 

programme Roadmap to the policy-making process?

1.2  THE HISTORY OF EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY ACTORS 

  49

By answering these core questions through the analysis of the ‘Roadmap 
for Equality between Women and Men 2006–2010’ the study illuminates 
in detail the gender equality policy-making process vertically (inside insti-
tutions)  and  horizontally  (among  institutions)  regarding  actors,  rules, 
routines and policy implications.

The book comprises an introductory chapter, four empirical chapters 
and a conclusion. This chapter introduced a critical reading of  structuration 
theory and its application to EU gender equality policy as its theoretical 
framework; it provided a historical account of EU gender equality policy 
milestones regarding actors, (legislative) scope and content.

Chapter 2 dives into the details of gender equality policy-making by 
analysing the formal and informal drafting and adoption process of the 
Roadmap. How did actors develop the Roadmap as a gender equality pol-
icy programme over the course of time? How are three distinct, yet over-
lapping processes—the internal Commission process, the process external 
to the Commission and the process between the internal and the external 
process—organised and how does the interplay between actors, rules and 
routines evolve over time?

Chapter  3  examines  how  actors  interpreted  and  (re)constructed  the 
Roadmap policy process and which specific features played a role in the 
initial period, during the drafting process and after the Roadmap’s adop-
tion. Why do different actors interpret the same policy process differently? 
The chapter clarifies the collaboration among actors and the power rela-
tions within the policy process.

The  fourth  chapter  discusses  four  overarching  factors  for  explaining 
how actors interpreted the policy-making process and how these relate to 
the  broader  structural  context  of  EU  gender  equality  policy-making. 
Prioritising standard EU policy-making rules in favour of previous infor-
mal  collaborations  changed  the  way  in  which  actors  collaborate  in  the 
EU’s gender equality policy. Crucial changes in the constellation of previ-
ous actors and in the EU structure caused a halt in the deepening and 
widening of EU gender equality policy through policy programmes.

The policy implications of the Roadmap and their consequences for the 
succeeding policy-making is the main focus in the fifth and final chapter. 
The unintended consequences of the Roadmap process reveal short-term 
implications, such as a lack of accountability and obligation and the ques-
tionable relevance of the Roadmap in the everyday work of civil servants. 
It also had long-term implications, like a vanishing budget and a reduction 
in the commitment to collaboration.

 
50 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

noTes

 
  1.  Hereafter  Roadmap.  Cf.  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the 
Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the  European  Economic  and  Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions: A Roadmap for equality 
between women and men 2006–2010. COM (2006) 92 final.

  2.  The term ‘gender equality policy’ will be used throughout the book, even 
though historically speaking it would be more appropriate to differentiate 
between  women’s  policy  and  equal  opportunities  policy.  The  author  is 
aware that many researchers have characterised most periods as women’s 
policy, and rightly so; however, the term gender equality policy will be used 
for the sake of simplification. Gender equality policy is defined as compris-
ing all policies that aim to eradicate inequalities, discrimination and disad-
vantages  based  on  sex  by  promoting  equality  in  terms  of  its  structural, 
symbolic and subjective dimension. In the context of gender equality, the 
term gender must be understood as gender + equality policies aiming to 
grasp  questions  of  intersectionality  and  multiple  discrimination,  as  sug-
gested by the research network QUING, www.quing.eu.

  3.  In 1993, the Treaty on European Union established the European Union. 
I will use the term European Union and/or EU throughout the chapters, 
even though the historical name was the European Economic Community 
(EEC).

  4.  In this study, policy programmes are defined as a line of argument rational-
ising a plan of action and/or procedure adopted and pursued by an indi-
vidual, institution or social group.

  5.  Hard law comprises directives, regulations and decisions, for instance.
  6.  Over time, there have been a growing number of soft law tools, such as 
green  or  white  books,  the  Open  Method  of  Coordination  (OMC)  or 
benchmarks. Communications are also a specific kind of soft law and there-
fore differ from hard law to a great extent.

  7.  Hereafter Commission.
  8.  Hereafter Council.
  9.  Hereafter EP.
 10.  Hereafter NGOs. In this study, I employ the term NGO as an overarching 
description of diverse lobby groups, women’s movements or social move-
ments; the conceptual distinction is beyond the scope and aim of this study. 
For a more detailed account of, for instance, the “NGOization of femi-
nism”, please refer to Sabine Lang (1997).

 11.  The main idea of the stages heuristic is a policy cycle defined and described 
by distinctive functional and temporal policy process stages according to 
the order in which they occur (e.g. problem identification /programming 
/implementation /evaluation). For details, please refer to e.g. Lerner and 
Lasswell (1951), Jones (1984) or Anderson (2010).

  NOTES 

  51

 12.  For  a  critical  evaluation  of  applying  the  ACF  to  the  EU  please  refer  to 

Patrycja Rozbicka (2013).

 13.  Other  scholars  such  as  Talcott  Parsons,  Jürgen  Habermas  and  Pierre 
Bourdieu share this aim, as do research strands such as relational sociology 
or to some extent social network analysis. However, none of them explic-
itly addressed this question and put it at the centre of the research approach.
 14.  By  contrast,  institutional  analysis  focuses  on  institutions  as  the  starting 
point of analysis: ‘Social analysis which places in suspension the skills and 
awareness  of  actors,  treating  institutions  as  chronically  reproduced  rules 
and resources’ (Giddens 1984: 375).

 15.  Whether the EU reproduced the androcentric character of nation states’ 
policy-making  (Schunter-Kleemann  1992;  Berghahn  1998)  or  actually 
forms  its  own  supranational  gender  regime  has  been,  and  remains,  dis-
puted (Kreisky et al. 2001; Abels 2011).

 16.  Against the background of feminist research, Giddens discusses changing 
gender  relations  and  their  ‘democratization’  in  his  later  work  ‘The 
Transformation of Intimacy’, published in 1993 (Evans 2003). References 
to gender issues are also made in some of his work on Europe (Giddens 
2007;  Giddens  et  al.  2006)  and  his  textbook  ‘Sociology’  (1997,  2001, 
2006, 2009). Giddens’ broadened his understanding of politics to include 
new political actors such as the women’s movement and their specific polit-
ical forms (Kahlert 2005).

 17.  Such a perspective is contrary to Foucault’s structuralism and recognises 
the dialectic of control when ‘(...) the less powerful manage resources in 
such ways as to exert some control over the more powerful in established 
relationships’ (Giddens 1984: 374).

 18.  John B. Thompson criticised Giddens for this definition of rules, because it 
neglects the fact that not all rules are of the same importance and fails to men-
tion which rules are relevant for which social structure (Thompson 1990).

 19.  Although  Giddens  refers  to  Garfinkel,  he  fails  to  integrate  the  findings 
concerning  the  genderedness  of  social  life  into  structuration  theory. 
However, gender roles and their translation in everyday life is a particularly 
stable  frame  consisting  of  rules  steering  people’s  behaviour.  These  rules 
vary over time and space; for instance, what is an acceptable job or dress for 
women or what roles mothers and fathers play in a child’s development.

 20.  Giddens explicates the duality of structure in his later works on intimacy 
and relationships, families, justice and the future of modern societies (cf. 
Giddens 1990, 1991, 1992, 1994, 1995).

 21.  A  detailed  account  of  methods  and  methodology  can  be  found  in  the 

annex.

 22.  Primary sources are defined as original documents produced by any kind of 
political  actor,  as  well  as  archival  material,  such  as  meeting  notes,  press 
releases or speeches (McCulloch 2004).

 
52 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

 23.  Throughout the book, the term gender equality policy will be used even 
though, historically speaking, it would be more appropriate to differentiate 
between  women’s  policy  and  equal  opportunities  policy.  The  author  is 
aware that many researchers have characterised most periods as women’s 
policy, and rightly so. For the sake of simplicity, the term gender equality 
policy will be used.

 24.  At present, Article 157 TFEU, Title X, Social Policy. The original Article 
119 was renumbered as Article 141 by the Treaty of Maastricht, with its 
revision extending it to equal pay for work of equal value (as opposed to 
equal pay for equal work).

 25.  Unanimity was the dominant decision- making procedure until the ratifica-

tion of the Single European Act in 1987.

 26.  Council Directive of 10th February 1975 on the approximation of laws of 
the Member States relating to the application of the principle of equal pay 
for men and women. Remarkably, Article 1 of the directive rephrased the 
text of Article 119 ‘equal pay for equal work’ into ‘equal pay for work of 
equal  value’,  thereby  substantially  widening  the  scope  of  the  directive 
(Schunter-Kleemann 1994). In addition, the equal pay directive was the 
first ever directive in EU social policy (Van der Vleuten 2007: 79f).

 27.  Council Directive 76/207/EEC of 9 February 1976 on the implementa-
tion  of  the  principle  of  equal  treatment  for  men  and  women  as  regards 
access  to  employment,  vocational  training  and  promotion,  and  working 
conditions.

 28.  Council Directive 79/7/EEC of 19 December 1978 on the progressive 
implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in 
matters of social security.

 29.  Council Directive 86/378/EEC of 24 July 1986 on the implementation 
of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in occupational 
social security schemes.

 30.  Between 1971 and 1996, the ECJ received 90 cases connected to women’s 
rights, more the half of which directly referred to Article 119 (Klein 2006: 74).
 31.  This lawsuit was called Defrenne II because the Belgian court only took 
the case to the ECJ after five years. In the meantime another court case, 
Defrenne vs. the Belgian State (Defrenne I), was immediately taken to the 
ECJ; Defrenne lost.

 32.  For  details  on  distinguishing  between  direct  and  indirect  discrimination 

please refer to Weiss (1998) or Epiney and Abt (2003).

 33.  82/43/EEC: Commission Decision of 9th December 1981 relating to the 
setting up of an Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women 
and Men. According to Annex II of the Roadmap, the Advisory Committee 
on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men shall assist the Commission 
in formulating and implementing the Community’s activities aimed at pro-

  NOTES 

  53

moting  equal  opportunities  for  women  and  men  and  foster  ongoing 
exchanges of relevant experience, policies and practices between the mem-
ber states and the various parties involved. It usually meets twice a year.

 34.  For  a  critical  review  of  the  term  and  its  appropriateness  please  refer  to 

Christina Ewig and Myra Marx Ferree (2013).

 35.  A new Community action programme on the promotion of equal oppor-
tunities for women 1982–85. Commission Communication to the Council. 
COM  (81)  758  final,  9  December  1981.  Bulletin  of  the  European 
Communities, Supplement 1/82.

 36.  Council Directive 86/613/EEC of 11th December 1986 on the applica-
tion of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged 
in an activity, including agriculture, in a self-employed capacity, and on the 
protection of self-employed women during pregnancy and motherhood.

 37.  Council Directive 92/85/EEC of 19th October 1992 on the introduction 
of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of 
pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breast-
feeding (tenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16 (1) of 
Directive 89/391/EEC).

 38.  Under  the  cooperation  procedure,  the  EP  issues  an  opinion  and  subse-
quently the Council adopts a ‘Common Position’ that can be amended or 
rejected  by  the  EP.  In  the  next  step,  the  Council  can  either  adopt  the 
amended proposal with a qualified majority or overrule it by unanimity. 
With the treaty of Lisbon (2009), the cooperation procedure was limited 
to some parts of economic and monetary policy.

 39.  The  ECJ  decided  that  ‘Community  competences  consisted  in  ‘[realising] 
equal treatment between men and women, not in a general fashion, but only 
as workers’, thereby conceiving a very restrictive definition of the legitimate 
frontiers of Community action’ (Jacquot 2010: 128).

 40.  For a detailed discussion of the impact of the ECJ rulings and the most 
famous cases please refer to Hoskyns (1996), Epiney and Abt (2003) or 
Klein (2006).

 41.  Equal  opportunities  for  women.  Medium- term  Community  programme 
1986–90. Commission Communication to the Council. COM (85) 801 
final  and  final/2,  19th  December  1985.  Bulletin  of  the  European 
Communities, Supplement 3/86. Second Council Resolution of 24th July 
1986  on  the  promotion  of  equal  opportunities  for  women,  OJ  C  203, 
12/08/1986.

 42.  Council  resolution  of  21th  May  1991  on  the  third  medium-term 
Community  action  programme  on  equal  opportunities  for  women  and 
men (1991–1995) (91/C 142/01).

 43.  The United Kingdom in particular blocked Commission proposals in social 

policy; not only regarding gender equality policy.

 
54 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

 44.  Hereafter FEMM committee, based on its French acronym for ‘femmes’. 
The name of the committee has changed over time and is nowadays the 
‘Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality’.

 45.  As opposed to European Communities.
 46.  The ratification was rather contested and finally incited member states to 
strengthen social policies as a means to ensure public support for European 
integration. The ratification process of this treaty was also of great interest 
from a gender perspective, because the majority of Danish women rejected 
the treaty in the Danish referendum (Liebert 1999). This was the first time 
that  a  treaty  had  been  rejected  and  one  of  the  reasons  for  it—Danish 
women fearing lower standards regarding gender equality laws—catapulted 
gender equality policy back into the focus of European integration.

 47.  Austria, Sweden, Finland.
 48.  Czech  Republic,  Cyprus,  Estonia,  Hungary,  Lithuania,  Latvia,  Malta, 

Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia.

 49.  The  previous  world  conferences  on  women  took  place  in  Mexico  City 

(1975), Copenhagen (1980) and Nairobi (1985).

 50.  Article 3(2), Treaty of Amsterdam: ‘In all the activities referred to in this 
Article, the Community shall aim to eliminate inequalities, and to promote 
equality, between men and women.’

 51.  Article 2, Treaty of Amsterdam: ‘The Community shall have as its task, by 
establishing a common market and an economic and monetary union and 
by implementing common policies or activities referred to in Articles 3 and 
3a, to promote throughout the Community a harmonious, balanced and 
sustainable  development  of  economic  activities,  a  high  level  of  employ-
ment and of social protection, equality between men and women, sustain-
able  and  non-inflationary  growth,  a  high  degree  of  competitiveness 
and convergence of economic performance, a high level of protection and 
improvement of the quality of the environment, the raising of the standard 
of living and quality of life, and economic and social cohesion and solidar-
ity among Member States.’ (Emphasis by author)

 52.  Already in 1996, the Commission adopted a ‘Communication from the 
Commission  ‘Incorporating  Equal  Opportunities  for  Women  and  Men 
into all Community Policies and Activities’, COM(96) 67 final’ signpost-
ing the idea of gender mainstreaming as the appropriate strategy for all 
policy fields.

 53.  Discussing details of the strategy gender mainstreaming and ideas about 
implementation would go beyond this study. For detailed accounts of the 
historical roots, presumptions and implementation strategies, please refer 
to Frey (2003), Rees (1998), Stiegler (2000).

 54.  Feminist traditions developed different visions of gender equality, each of 
which was connected to specific ideas about measures necessary. They can 

  NOTES 

  55

broadly be divided into inclusion (achieving sameness by adjusting to male 
norm),  reversal  (positive  actions  to  affirm  difference),  and  displacement 
(transformation of established norms) (Walby 2005; Squires 1999, 2005).
 55.  Cf.  Council  of  Europe/Group  of  Specialists  on  Mainstreaming  (1999), 
Gender Mainstreaming. Conceptual framework, methodology and presen-
tation of good practice. Final report of Activities of the Group of Specialists 
on Mainstreaming (EG-S-MS). Summary. EC (99) 3. Strasbourg.

 56.  According to Annex II of the Roadmap, the President of the Commission 
chairs the group, the members comprise the Commissioners for Justice, 
Freedom  and  Security;  for  Institutional  Relations  and  Communication 
Strategy; for Administration, Audit and Anti-fraud; for Information Society 
and  Media;  for  Education,  Training,  Culture  and  Multilingualism;  for 
Enlargement;  for  Development  and  Humanitarian  Aid;  for  External 
Relations and European Neighbourhood Policy; for Employment, Social 
Affairs and Equal Opportunities. Meetings should take place three to four 
times  per  year,  including  a  meeting  with  representatives  of  the  EP,  the 
EESC, the CoR, the presidency of the EU and women’s organisations on 
the 8th March, International Women’s Day. In 2005, the name changed to 
the “Group of Commissioners on Fundamental Rights, Non-Discrimination 
and  Equal  Opportunities”,  thereby  indicating  a  recent  turn  to  anti- 
discrimination policies (Ahrens 2008; Verloo 2007). It is also important to 
note  that  the  most  powerful  DGs—Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs, 
Enterprise  and  Industry,  Competition,  Agriculture,  Budget,  Internal 
Market, Trade—did not participate.

 57.  Hereafter  Gender  Equality  Unit.  The  ‘Equal  Opportunities  Unit’  was 
divided  into  two  different  Units  after  the  enlargement  to  Central  and 
Eastern  Europe  in  2004:  ‘Equality  between  Women  and  Men’  and 
‘Equality:  Legal  Questions’.  The  former  was  the  Unit  in  charge  of  EU 
gender equality policy, while the latter was in charge of monitoring imple-
mentation and enforcement of the directives and the acquis communau-
taire in the member states.

 58.  The change can be seen as a direct response to the ECJ cases ‘Kalanke’ 
(1995) ruled that positive action measures were incompatible with EU law 
when  they  automatically  and  unconditionally  prioritise  women,  and 
‘Marschall’ (1997) ruled that positive action measures are allowed provid-
ing they do not automatically prioritise women (Epiney and Abt 2003).

 59.  Article 13(1), Treaty of Amsterdam: “Without prejudice to the other pro-
visions of this Treaty and within the limits of the powers conferred by it 
upon  the  Community,  the  Council,  acting  unanimously  on  a  proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament, may 
take appropriate action to combat discrimination based on sex, racial or 
ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation.”

 
56 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

 60.  Important factors were the rise of the radical right in large member states 
and finally the participation of the extreme right-wing Austrian Freedom 
Party (FPÖ) in the 2000 Austrian government (Givens and Evans Case 
2014; Amiraux and Guiraudon 2010).

 61.  Council Directive 96/34/EC of 3th June 1996 on the framework agree-

ment on parental leave concluded by UNICE, CEEP and the ETUC.

 62.  Council  Directive  97/81/EC  of  15th  December  1997  concerning  the 
Framework Agreement on part-time work concluded by UNICE, CEEP 
and the ETUC—Annex: Framework agreement on part-time work.

 63.  Council Directive 97/80/EC of 15th December 1997 on the burden of 

proof in cases of discrimination based on sex.

 64.  Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
23th September 2002 amending Council Directive 76/207/EEC on the 
implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as 
regards  access  to  employment,  vocational  training  and  promotion,  and 
working conditions.

 65.  Based on Article 13, two more directives were adopted: the ‘Race direc-
tive’ (Council Directive 2000/43/EC of 29th June 2000, implementing 
the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or 
ethnic  origin),  and  the  ‘Employment  Equality  Framework  Directive’ 
(Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27th November 2000, establishing a 
general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation). 
Despite not specifically addressing gender equality, they are also of great 
importance to it (Van der Vleuten 2007).

 66.  Council Directive 2004/113/EC of 13th December 2004 implementing 
the principle of equal treatment between men and women in the access to 
and supply of goods and service.

 67.  The OMC relies on ‘naming and shaming’ and mechanisms such as guide-
lines,  indicators,  benchmarking  and  best  practice.  In  the  beginning,  the 
EES  addressed  gender  equality  as  one  of  the  four  pillars  ‘strengthening 
equal opportunities’, and later introduced gender mainstreaming as a hori-
zontal objective. For a detailed account of the relationship between gender 
equality  policy  and  the  OMC,  please  refer  to  the  edited  book  by  Fiona 
Beveridge and Samantha Velluti (2008).

 68.  The OMC was subsequently extended to pensions, social inclusion, health 

and long-term care.

 69.  Nonetheless, the EES did not encourage fostering a dual caring model at 

the same time (Mósesdóttir 2003).

 70.  95/593/EC: Council Decision of 22th December 1995 on a medium-
term Community action programme on equal opportunities for men and 
women (1996–2000)

 71.  From  2010  on  published  as  ‘Report  on  Progress  on  Equality  between 

Women and Men’.

  NOTES 

  57

 72.  For a critical review please refer to Rönnblom (2005).
 73.  Council  Decision  2001/51/EC  of  20  December  2000  establishing  a 
Programme  relating  to  the  Community  framework  strategy  on  gender 
equality (2001–2005).

 74.  Hereafter framework strategy. Communication from the Commission to 
the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the  Economic  and  Social 
Committee,  the  Committee  of  the  Regions.  Towards  a  Community 
Framework  Strategy  on  Gender  Equality  (2001–2005),  2000/0143 
(CNS).

 75.  Cf. Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European 
Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of 
the Regions—Towards a community framework strategy on gender equal-
ity (2001–2005), COM/2000/0335 final, p. 2.

 76.  Interinstitutional means that representatives from member state adminis-

tration and from the Commission participate.

 77.  Informal meetings were convened irregularly since 1989. The opening of 
the  ‘European  Year  of  Equal  Opportunities  for  All  2007’  during  the 
German presidency earmarked the first ever official Equal Opportunities 
Summit in the EU.

 78.  Bulgaria and Romania 2007, Croatia 2013.
 79.  The  four  directives  were  the  Equal  Pay  Directive,  the  Equal  Treatment 
Directive, the Occupational Social Security Directive and the Burden of 
Proof  Directive.  For  a  critical  review,  please  refer  to  Annick  Masselot 
(2007).

 80.  Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council 
on improving the gender balance among non-executive directors of com-
panies  listed  on  stock  exchanges  and  related  measures,  2012/0299 
(COD).

 81.  Hereafter  Roadmap.  Cf.  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the 
Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the  European  Economic  and  Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions: A Roadmap for equality 
between women and men 2006–2010. COM (2006) 92 final.

 82.  Cf. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, 
the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of 
the Regions. Strategy for equality between women and men 2010–2015, 
COM (2010) 491 final.

 83.  The BPfA is mentioned later in the chapter on external relations as if it 

would be only relevant outside the EU.

 84.  Cf. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, 
the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of 
the Regions. Strategy for equality between women and men 2010–2015, 
COM (2010) 491 final.

 
58 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

references

Abels, Gabriele. 2011. Gender Equality Policy. In Policies within the EU Multi- 
Level System. Instruments and Strategies of European Governance, ed. Hubert 
Heinelt and Michèle Knodt, 325–348. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Abels,  Gabriele,  and  Joyce  Marie  Mushaben.  2012.  Gendering  the  European 
Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits. Houndmills, Basingstoke; 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

———.  2012.  Introduction:  Studying  the  EU  from  a  Gender  Perspective.  In 
Gendering the European Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits, ed. 
Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 1–21. Houndmills, Basingstoke; 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Acker, Joan. 1990. Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A Theory of Gendered Organizations. 

———. 1992. From Sex Roles to Gendered Institutions. Contemporary Sociology 

Gender & Society 2: 139–158.

21 (5): 565–569.

Ahrens,  Petra.  2002.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  der  Beschäftigungspolitik  der 
Europäischen  Union  –  Im  Spannungsfeld  feministischer  Theorien  und  poli-
tischer Praxis. Thesis, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Hamburg: Diplomica.
———.  2008.  More  Actors  Butter  No  Parsnips:  Gaining  Insights  into  Gender 
Equality Programs of the European Union. 4th Pan-European Conference on 
EU Politics, University of Latvia, 25–27 September 2008, Riga, Latvia.

———.  2015.  Das  Ende  einer  Ära?  Gleichstellungspolitische  Programme  der 

Europäischen Union. femina politica 24 (2): 105–109.

Ahrens,  Petra,  and  Jochen  Geppert.  2005.  Gender  Mainstreaming  als 
Organisationsentwicklung, text version of the eponymous speech, Conference 
“Implementierung von Gender Mainstreaming in der öffentlichen Verwaltung – 
Chancen  und  Herausforderungen  der  Organisationsentwicklung”,  June  27, 
2005, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Gender KompetenzZentrum. Accessed 
October 1, 2013. www.genderkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/vortrag_ 
gm_als_oe.pdf.

Ahrens,  Petra,  and  Sandra  Lewalter.  2005.  Möglichkeiten  der  Steuerung  bei  der 
Umsetzung von Gender Mainstreaming im Übergang zur Regelpraxis, text ver-
sion  of  the  eponymous  speech,  Conference  “Implementierung  von  Gender 
Mainstreaming in der öffentlichen Verwaltung – Chancen und Herausforderungen 
der  Organisationsentwicklung”,  June  27,  2005.  Humboldt-Universität  zu 
Berlin,  Gender  KompetenzZentrum.  Accessed  October  1,  2013.   www.gen-
derkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/vortrag_steuerungsmöglichkeiten.pdf.
———.  2006.  Das  Europäische  Institut  für  Gleichstellungsfragen  –  Was  lange 

währt wird endlich gut? femina politica 2: 124–127.

Ahrens, Petra, and Anna van der Vleuten. 2017. EU Gender Equality Policies and 
Politics  –  New  Modes  of  Governance.  In  Gender  and  Diversity  Studies  in 

  REFERENCES 

  59

European  Perspectives,  ed.  Carola  Bauschke-Urban  and  Ingrid  Jungwirth. 
Opladen: Barbara Budrich.

Amiraux, Valérie, and Virginie Guiraudon. 2010. Discrimination in Comparative 
Perspective:  Policies  and  Practices.  American  Behavioral  Scientist  53  (12): 
1691–1714.

Anderson, James E. 2010. Public Policymaking. An Introduction. 7th ed. Boston: 

Wadsworth.

Berghahn,  Sabine.  1998.  Zwischen  marktvermittelter  Geschlechtergleichheit  im 
europäischen  “Herrenclub”  und  den  patriarchalischen  Traditionalismen  von 
Mitgliedsstaaten:  Gibt 
europäischen 
Gleichheitsentwicklung für Frauen?’. femina politica 7 (2): 46–55.

“Mehrwert” 

einen 

der 

es 

Berghahn, Sabine, and Maria Wersig. 2005. Einflüsse des Europäischen Rechts auf 
die  Geschlechterverhältnisse  und  andere  Diskriminierungsgründe,  genderpoli-
tikonline,  Berlin.  http://web.fu-berlin.de/gpo/pdf/tagungen/eurorecht_
geschl_bergh_wers.pdf.

Beveridge, Fiona. 2007. Building Against the Past: The Impact of Mainstreaming 

on EU Gender Law and Policy. European Law Review 32: 193–212.

Beveridge,  Fiona,  and  Samantha  Velluti.  2008.  Gender and the Open Method of 
Coordination:  Perspectives  on  Law,  Governance  and  Equality  in  the  EU. 
Aldershot: Ashgate.

———. (2008). Gender and the OMC: Conclusion and Prospects. In Gender and 
the Open Method of Coordination: Perspectives on Law, Governance and Equality 
in  the  EU,  ed.  Fiona  Beveridge  and  Samantha  Velluti,  191–208.  Adlershot: 
Ashgate.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 2005. Die männliche Herrschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Braithwaite,  Mary.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Commission: 

Explaining the Roller Coaster of Progress and Regression. Brussels: Engender.

Bretherton,  Charlotte.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  EU  Enlargement: 

Swimming against the Tide? Journal of European Public Policy 8 (1): 60–81.

Bretherton,  Charlotte,  and  Liz  Sperling.  1996.  Women’s  Networks  and  the 
European Union: Towards an Inclusive Approach? Journal of Common Market 
Studies 4: 487–508.

Bryant,  Christopher,  and  David  Jary  (ed.),  (2001),  The Contemporary Giddens: 

Social Theory in a Globalizing Age. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bryant, Christopher, and David Jary (ed.). (2001). Anthony Giddens: A Global 
Social Theorist. In The Contemporary Giddens: Social Theory in a Globalizing 
Age,  ed.  Christopher  Bryant  and  David  Jary,  3–41.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 
Macmillan.

Büchs, Milena. 2007. New Governance in European Social Policy: The Open Method 

of Coordination. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Butler,  Judith.  1990.  Gender  Trouble  Feminism  and  the  Subversion  of  Identity. 

New York: Routledge.

 
60 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Büttner, Sebastian M., Lucia Leopold, Steffen Mau, and Matthias Posvic. 2015. 
Professionalization in EU Policy-Making? The Typology of the Transnational 
Field of EU Affairs. European Societies 17 (4): 569–592.

Cavaghan,  Rosalind.  2012.  Gender  Mainstreaming  as  a  Knowledge  Process: 
Towards an Understanding of Perpetuation and Change in Gender Blindness 
and Gender Bias. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh.

Chappell,  Louise.  2010.  Comparative  Gender  and  Institutions:  Directions  for 

Research. Perspectives on Politics 8 (1): 183–189.

Checkel,  Jeffrey  T.  1998.  The  Constructivist  Turn  in  International  Relations 

Theory. World Politics 50: 324–348.

———. 2005. International Institutions and Socialization in Europe: Introduction 

and Framework. International Organization 59 (4): 801–826.

Christiansen,  Thomas,  Knud  Erik  Jørgensen,  and  Antje  Wiener.  2001. 
Introduction. In The Social Construction of Europe, ed. Thomas Christiansen, 
Knud Erik Jørgensen, and Antje Wiener, 1–19. London: Sage.

Cichowski, Rachel A. 2001. Judicial Rulemaking and the Institutionalization of 
European Union Sex Equality Policy. In The Institutionalization of Europe, ed. 
Alec  Stone  Sweet,  Wayne  Sandholtz,  and  Neil  Fligstein,  112–136.  Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.

Cohen, Michael D., James G. March, and Johan P. Olsen. 1972. A Garbage Can 
Model  of  Organizational  Choice.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly  17  (1): 
1–25.

Connell, Raewyn. 1987. Gender and Power: Society, the Person and Sexual Politics. 

Cambridge: Polity Press.

Corbett, Richard, Francis Jacobs, and Michael Shackleton. (2011). The European 

Parliament: 8th. Rev. ed. London: John Harper Publishing.

Council  of  Europe/Group  of  Specialists  on  Mainstreaming.  1999.  Gender 
Mainstreaming. Conceptual Framework, Methodology and Presentation of Good 
Practice. Final report of Activities of the Group of Specialists on Mainstreaming 
(EG-S-MS). Summary. EC (99) 3. Strasbourg.

Cross,  Mai’a  K.D.  2011.  Security  Integration  in  Europe:  How  Knowledge-Based 
Networks  are  Transforming  the  European  Union.  Ann  Arbor:  University  of 
Michigan Press.

Davis, Kathy, Monique Leijenaar, and Jantine Oldersma, eds. 1991. The Gender of 

Power6. London: Sage.

DiMaggio,  Paul  J.,  and  Walter  W.  Powell.  1983.  The  Iron  Cage  Revisited: 
Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields. 
American Sociological Review 48: 147–160.

van Doorne-Huiskes, Anneke. 1997. Equal Opportunities in the European Union: 
Theory  and  Practice.  In  Gender  and  Economics:  A  European  Perspective,  ed. 
A. Geske Dijkstra and Janneke Plantenga. London: Routledge.

Ellina, Chrystalla A. 2003. Promoting Women’s Rights the Politics of Gender in the 

European Union. New York: Routledge.

Ellis, Evelyn. 1998. European Community Sex Equality Law. New York: Clarendon 

Press.

  REFERENCES 

  61

Epiney, Astrid, and Marianne Freiermuth Abt. 2003. Das Recht der Gleichstellung 

von Mann und Frau in der EU. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Esping-Andersen, Gøsta, ed. 2002. Why We Need a New Welfare State. Oxford: 

Oxford University Press.

European  Commission.  2013.  PROGRESS  Annual  Performance  Monitoring 
Report  2012.  Monitoring  of  the  Performance  of  the  European  Union 
Programme  for  Employment  and  Social  Solidarity.  PROGRESS  (2007–13). 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.

Evans, Mary. 2003. Gender and Social Theory. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Ewig, Christina, and Myra Marx Ferree. 2013. Feminist Organizing: What’s Old, 
What’s New? History, Trends and Issues. In The Oxford Handbook of Gender 
and Politics, ed. Georgina Waylen, Karen Celis, Johanna Kantola, and Laurel 
S. Weldon, 437–461. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

Falkner,  Gerda.  2000.  Policy  Networks  in  a  Multi-Level  System:  Convergence 

Towards Moderate Diversity? West European Politics 23 (4): 94–120.

Favell,  Adrien,  and  Virginie  Guiraudon,  eds.  2011.  Sociology  of  the  European 

Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

———, eds. 2011. Introduction. In Sociology of the European Union, ed. Adrien 

Favell and Virginie Guiraudon. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Fraser, Nancy, and Axel Honneth. 2005. Umverteilung oder Anerkennung?: Eine 

politisch-philosophische Kontroverse. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Fredman, Sandra. 1992. European Community Discrimination Law: A Critique. 

The Industrial Law Journal 20 (2): 119–134.

———. 2006. Transformation or Dilution: Fundamental Rights in the EU Social 

Space. European Law Journal 12 (1): 41–60.

Frey, Regina. 2003. Gender im Mainstreaming: Geschlechtertheorie und -praxis im 

internationalen Diskurs. Königstein/Taunus: Helmer.

Fuhrmann, Nora. 2005. Geschlechterpolitik im Prozess der europäischen Integration. 

Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Galligan, Yvonne, and Sara Clavero. 2012. Gendering Enlargement of the EU. In 
Gendering the European Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits, ed. 
Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 104–123. Houndmills, Basingstoke; 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Geddes, Andrew, and Virginie Guiraudon. 2004. Britain, France, and EU Anti- 
Discrimination  Policy:  The  Emergence  of  an  EU  Policy  Paradigm.  West 
European Politics 27 (2): 334–353.

Giddens, Anthony. 1976. New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of 

Interpretative Sociologies. London: Hutchinson.

———.  1979.  Central  Problems  in  Social  Theory:  Action,  Structure,  and 

Contradiction in Social Analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 
62 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

———. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. 

Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 1989. A Reply to My Critics. In Social Theory of Modern Societies: Anthony 
Giddens and His Critics, ed. David Held and John B. Thompson, 249–300. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1990. The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
———. 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity. Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. 

Cambridge: Polity Press.

———. 1992. The Transformation of Intimacy: Sexuality, Love, and Eroticism in 

Modern Societies. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

———.  1994.  Beyond  Left  and  Right:  the  Future  of  Radical  Politics.  Stanford: 

Stanford University Press.

———. 1995. Konsequenzen der Moderne. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
———. 2007. Europe in the Global Age. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, Anthony, Patrick Diamond, and Roger Liddle, eds. 2006. Global Europe, 

Social Europe. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Givens, Terri E., and Rhonda Evans Case. 2014. Legislating Equality. The Politics 

of Antidiscrimination Policy in Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Glaser, Barney G., and Anselm Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory. 

Strategies for Qualitative Research. Chicago: Aldine.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of 

Embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology 91 (3): 481–510.

Greenwood,  Justin.  2007.  Interest  representation  in  the  European  Union. 

New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Haas,  Peter  M.  1992.  Introduction:  Epistemic  Communities  and  International 

Policy Coordination. International Organization 46 (1): 1–35.

Hall, Peter A., and Rosemary C.R. Taylor. 1996. Political Science and the Three 

Institutionalisms. Political Studies 44 (5): 936–957.

Hantrais, Linda, ed. 2000. Gendered Policies in Europe: Reconciling Employment 

and Family Life. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

———.  2003.  Social  Policy  in  the  European  Union.  Basingstoke,  Hampshire: 

Palgrave Macmillan.

Hawkesworth, Mary. 2010. Policy Discourse as Sanctioned Ignorance: Theorizing 

the Erasure of Feminist Knowledge. Critical Policy Studies 3 (3–4): 268–289.

Helfferich,  Barbara,  and  Felix  Kolb.  2001.  Multilevel  Action  Coordination  in 
European Contentious Politics - the Case of the European Women’s Lobby. In 
Contentious Europeans, ed. Douglas R. Imig and Sidney G. Tarrow. Lanham: 
Rowman & Littlefield.

Héritier,  Adrienne.  2003.  New  Modes  of  Governance  in  Europe:  Increasing 
Political Capacity and Policy Effectiveness. In The State of the European Union, 
6:  Law,  Politics,  and  Society  in  Europe,  ed.  Tanja  A.  Börzel  and  Rachel 
A. Cichowski, 105–126. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

  REFERENCES 

  63

Hix, Simon. 2005. The Political System of the European Union. London: Palgrave 

Macmillan.

Hooghe, Liesbet. 2002. The European Commission and the Integration of Europe: 

Images of Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———.  2005.  Several  Roads  Lead  to  International  Norms,  But  Few  Via 
International  Socialization:  A  Case  Study  of  the  European  Commission. 
International Organization 59 (4): 861–898.

Hoskyns, Catherine. 1996. Integrating Gender: Women, Law and Politics in the 

European Union. London: Verso.

———. 2000. A Study of Four Action Programmes on Equal Opportunities. In 
Gender  Policies  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Maria  Grazia  Rossilli,  43–59. 
New York, NY: Lang.

Imig,  Douglas  R.,  and  Sidney  G.  Tarrow,  eds.  2001.  Contentious  Europeans: 

Protest and Politics in an Emerging Polity. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.

Immergut, Ellen. 1998. The Theoretical Core of the New Institutionalism. Politics 

and Society 26 (1): 5–34.

Jacquot,  Sophie.  2010.  The  Paradox  of  Gender  Mainstreaming:  Unanticipated 
Effects of New Modes of Governance in the Gender Equality Domain. West 
European Politics 33 (1): 118–135.

———.  2015.  Transformations  in  EU  Gender  Equality.  From  Emergence  to 

Dismantling. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Jenson, Jane. 2008. Writing Women Out, Folding Gender In. Social Politics 15 

Jónasdóttir, Anna G., and Kathleen B. Jones, eds. 2009. The Political Interests of 
Gender Revisited: Redoing Theory and Research with a Feminist Face. Tokyo; 
New York; Paris: United Nations University Press.

Jones,  Charles  O.  1984.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Public  Policy.  Boston: 

(2): 131–153.

Wadsworth.

Kahlert, Heike. 2005. “Das Private ist Politisch!” Die Entgrenzung des Politischen 
im Kontext von Anthony Giddens’ Strukturierungstheorie. In Forschungsfeld 
Politik. Geschlechtskategoriale Einführung in die Sozialwissenschaften, ed. Cilja 
Harders, Heike Kahlert, and Delia Schindler, 147–173. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.
Kantola,  Johanna.  2006.  Feminists  Theorize  the  State.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 

Macmillan.

———. 2010. Gender and the European Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kantola, Johanna, and Kevät Nousiainen. 2012. European Union as an Initiator of 
New European Anti-discrimination Regime. In Institutionalising Intersectionality? 
The Changing Nature of European Equality Regimes, ed. Andrea Krizsan, Hege 
Skjeie, and Judith Squires. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Karamessini, Maria, and Jill Rubery, eds. 2013. Women and Austerity: The Economic 

Crisis and the Future for Gender Equality. London; New York: Routledge.

Kenny, Meryl. 2007. Gender, Institutions and Power: A Critical Review. Politics 

27 (2): 91–100.

 
64 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Kingdon, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston: Little, 

Brown and Company.

Klatzer, Elisabeth, and Christina Schlager. 2014. Gender and Macroeconomics: 
Economic Governance in the European Union – Reconfiguration of Gendered 
Power Structures and Erosion of Gender Equality. In The SAGE Handbook auf 
Feminist  Theory,  ed.  Mary  Evans,  Clare  Hemmings,  Marsha  Henry,  Hazel 
Johnstone,  Sumi  Madhok,  Ania  Plomien,  and  Sadie  Wearing,  483–499. 
London: Sage.

Klein,  Uta.  2006.  Geschlechterverhältnisse  und  Gleichstellungspolitik  in  der 
Europäischen Union. Akteure - Themen - Ergebnisse. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für 
Sozialwissenschaften.

Knoke, David. 1990. Networks of Political Action: Toward Theory Construction. 

Social Forces 68 (4): 1041–1063.

Kolinsky,  Eva,  and  Hildegard  Maria  Nickel.  2003.  Introduction:  Reinventing 
Gender after the GDR. In Reinventing Gender: Women in Eastern Germany 
Since Unification, ed. Eva Kolinsky and Hildegard Maria Nickel, 1–27. London; 
Portland, OR: Cass.

Kreisky,  Eva,  Sabine  Lang,  and  Birgit  Sauer,  eds.  2001.  EU.  Geschlecht.  Staat. 

Wien: WUV.

Krizsan, Andrea, Judith Squires, and Hege Skjeie, eds. 2012. Institutionalizing 
Intersectionality.  The  Changing  Nature  of  European  Equality  Regimes. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Krook, Mona Lena, and Fiona Mackay, eds. 2011. Gender, Politics and Institutions. 

Towards a Feminist Institutionalism. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Lamla, Jörn. 2003. Anthony Giddens. Frankfurt am Main: Campus.
Lang, Sabine. 1997. The NGOization of Feminism. In Transitions, Environments, 
Translations: Feminisms in International Politics, ed. Joan Wallach Scott, Cora 
Kaplan, and Debra Keates, 101–120. New York: Routledge.

———. 2009. Assessing Advocacy: Transnational Women’s Networks and Gender 

Mainstreaming in the European Union. Social Politics 16 (3): 327–357.

Lemke, Christiane. 2004. Frauen in guter Verfassung? Gleichstellungspolitik in der 
europäischen Union. Chance Europa—Chance für Frauen, 3. Frauenpolitische 
Fachtagung des Deutschen Beamtinnen Bund (dbb). Accessed June 29, 2017. 
http://www.dbb.de/fileadmin/pdfs/frauen/2012/dokumentation_fachta-
gung_3_europa.pdf

Lerner, Daniel, and Harold Lasswell. 1951. The Policy Sciences. Stanford: Stanford 

University Press.

Liebert, Ulrike. 1999. Gender Politics in the European Union: The Return of the 

Public. European Societies 1 (2): 191–232.

———. 2003. Gendering Europeanisation: Patterns and Dynamics. In Gendering 

Europeanisation, ed. Ulrike Liebert, 255–283. Bruxelles: PIE Lang.

Locher,  Birgit,  and  Elisabeth  Prügl.  2001.  Feminism  and  Constructivism:  World’s 
Apart or Sharing the Middle Ground? International Studies Quarterly 45: 111–129.

  REFERENCES 

  65

Lombardo,  Emanuela.  2005.  Integrating  or  Setting  the  Agenda?  Gender 
Mainstreaming in the European Constitution-Making Process. Social Politics 
12 (3): 412–432.

———. 2016. Social Constructivism in European Integration Theories: Gender 
and Intersectionality Perspectives. In Gendering European Integration Theory. 
Engaging New Dialogues. Opladen, ed. Gabriele Abels and Heather MacRae, 
123–146. Berlin & Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.

Lombardo,  Emanuela,  and  Maxime  Forest,  eds.  2012.  The  Europeanization  of 
Gender  Equality  Policies.  A  Discursive-Sociological  Approach.  Houndsmill, 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Lombardo, Emanuela, and Petra Meier. 2008. Framing Gender Equality in the 

European Union Discourse. Social Politics 15 (1): 101–129.

Lombardo, Emanuela, Petra Meier, and Mieke Verloo, eds. 2009. The Discursive 
Politics  of  Gender  Equality:  Stretching,  Bending  and  Policymaking.  London: 
Routledge.

———.  2010.Discursive  Dynamics  in  Gender  Equality  Politics:  What  about 

‘Feminist Taboos’? European Journal of Women’s Studies 17 (2): 105–123.

———. 2013. Policy-Making. In The Oxford Handbook of Gender and Politics, ed. 
Georgina  Waylen,  Karen  Celis,  Johanna  Kantola,  and  Laurel  S.  Weldon, 
679–702. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

Lombardo, Emanuela, and Mieke Verloo. 2009. Institutionalising Intersectionality 
in the European Union? Policy Developments and Contestations. International 
Feminist Journal of Politics 11 (4): S.478–S.495.

Loyal, Steven. 2003. The Sociology of Anthony Giddens. London: Pluto.
Mackay, Fiona, Meryl Kenny, and Louise Chappell. 2010. New Institutionalism 
Through a Gender Lens: Towards a Feminist Institutionalism? International 
Political Science Review 31 (5): 573–588.

MacKinnon, Catharine A. 1989. Toward a Feminist Theory of the State. Cambridge: 

Harvard University Press.

March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. 1984. The New Institutionalism: Organizational 
Factors in Political Life. The American Political Science Review 78 (2): 734–749.
March,  James  G.,  and  Johann  P.  Olsen.  1989.  Rediscovering  Institutions.  The 

Organizational Basis of Politics. New York: The Free Press.

Marks,  Gary,  and  Doug  McAdam.  1999.  On  the  Relationship  of  Political 
Opportunities to the Form of Collective Action: The Case of the European 
Union. In Social Movements in a Globalizing World, ed. Donnatella Della Porta, 
Hanspeter Kriesi, and Dieter Rucht, 97–111. Chippenham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Marsh, David, ed. 1998. Comparing Policy Networks. Buckingham, Philadelphia: 

Open University Press.

Marshall, Barbara L. 1994. Engendering Modernity. Feminism, Social Theory and 

Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Marshall, Barbara L., and Anne Witz, eds. 2004. Engendering the Social Feminist 

Encounters with Sociological Theory. Maidenhead: Open University Press.

 
66 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Masselot,  Annick.  2007.  The  State  of  Gender  Equality  Law  in  the  European 

Union. European Law Journal 13 (2): 152–168.

Mazey,  Sonia.  1998.  The  European  Union  and  Women’s  Rights:  From  the 
Europeanization  of  National  Agendas  to  the  Nationalization  of  a  European 
Agenda. Journal of European Public Policy 5 (1): 131–152.

———. 2001. Gender Mainstreaming in the EU: Principles and Practice. London: 

Kogan Page.

———. 2012. Policy Entrepreneurship, Group Mobilisation and the Creation of 
a  New  Policy  Domain:  Women’s  Rights  and  the  European  Union.  In 
Constructing a Policy-Making State? Policy Dynamics in the European Union, 
ed. Jeremy Richardson, 125–144. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Mazey, Sonia, and Jeremy Richardson. 2006. The Commission and the Lobby. In 
The European Commission, ed. David Spence, 279–290. London: John Harper 
Publishing.

McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald, eds. 1996. Comparative 
Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, 
and Cultural Framings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

McCulloch,  Gary.  2004.  Documentary  Research  in  Education,  History  and  the 

Social Sciences. New York: Routledge.

Mérand,  Frédéric.  2011.  EU  Policies.  In  Sociology  of  the  European  Union,  ed. 
Adrien  Favell  and  Virginie  Guiraudon,  172–192.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 
Macmillan.

Merton, Robert K. 1957. The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy. In Social Theory and Social 

Structure, ed. K. Merton, 2nd ed., 475–490. New York: Free Press.

Montoya,  Celeste.  2008.  The  European  Union,  Capacity  Building,  and 
Transnational  Networks:  Combating  Violence  Against  Women  Through  the 
Daphne Program. International Organization 62 (1): 359–372.

———. 2009. International Initiative and Domestic Reforms: European Union 
Efforts to Combat Violence Against Women. Politics & Gender 5 (3): 325–348.
Mósesdóttir,  Magnussen.  2003.  Moving  Europe  Towards  the  Dual  Breadwinner 
Model. Five Years of Experience of the Luxembourg Employment Strategy. Brussels: 
ETUI.

Murgatroyd,  Linda.  1989.  Only  half  the  story:  Some  blinkering  Effects  of 
‘Malestream’ Sociology. In Social Theory of Modern Societies, Anthony Giddens 
and his Critics, ed. David Held and John B. Thompson, 147–167. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Ortmann, Günther. 2008. Organisation und Welterschließung. Dekonstruktionen. 

Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.

Ostner,  Ilona.  1995.  Arm  ohne  Ehemann?  Sozialpolitische  Regulierung  von 
Lebenschancen  für  Frauen  im  internationalen  Vergleich.  Aus  Politik  und 
Zeitgeschichte, Beilage zur Wochenzeitung Das Parlament B 36–37 (95): 3–12.

Ostner, Ilona, and Jane Lewis. 1998. Geschlechterpolitik zwischen europäischer 
und  nationalstaatlicher  Regelung.  In  Standort  Europa:  sozialpolitik  zwischen 

  REFERENCES 

  67

nationalstaat  und  Europäischer  integration,  ed.  Stephan  Leibfried  and  Paul 
Pierson, 196–239. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Perreira,  Maria  do  Mar.  2012.  ‘Feminist  Theory  is  Proper  Knowledge,  But…’: 
The  Status  of  Feminist  Scholarship  in  the  Academy.  Feminist  Theory  13: 
283–303.

Peters,  B.  Guy.  1999.  Institutional  Theory  in  Political  Science.  The  New 

Institutionalism. London: Pinter.

Pierson,  Paul,  and  Theda  Skocpol.  2002.  Historical  Institutionalism 

in 
Contemporary Political Science. In Political Science: State of the Discipline, ed. 
Ira Katznelson and Helen V. Milner, 693–721. New York: W.W. Norton.

Pollack, Mark A., and Hafner-Burton, Emilie. 2000. Mainstreaming Gender in the 
European Union. Harvard Jean Monnet Working Paper. 2/, 2000. Cambridge.
Powell, Walter W., and Paul J. DiMaggio, eds. 1991. The New Institutionalism in 

Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Prudovska,  Tetyana,  and  Myra  Max  Ferree.  2004.  Global  Activism  in  “Virtual 
Space”:  The  European  Women’s  Lobby  in  the  Network  of  Transnational 
Women’s NGOs on the Web. Social Politics 11 (1): 117–143.

Rai, Shirin. 2003. Mainstreaming Gender, Democratizing the State: Institutional 
Mechanisms for the Advancement of Women. Manchester: Manchester University 
Press.

Rees, Teresa L. 1998. Mainstreaming Equality in the European Union: Education 

Training and Labour Market Policies. London: Routledge.

Rolandsen Agustín, Lise. 2013. Gender Equality, Intersectionality and Diversity in 

Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Rönnblom, Malin. 2005. Letting Women In? Gender Mainstreaming in Regional 

Policies. NORA 13 (3): 164–174.

Rossilli, Mariagrazia. 1997. The European Community’s Policy on the Equality of 
Women: From the Treaty of Rome to the Present. European Journal of Women’s 
Studies European Journal of Women’s Studies 4 (1): 63–82.

Roth,  Silke,  ed.  2008.  Gender  Politics  in  the  Expanding  European  Union: 

Mobilization, Inclusion, Exclusion. Oxford; New York: Berghahn.

Rozbicka, Patrycja. 2013. Advocacy Coalitions: Influencing the Policy Process in 

the EU. Journal of European Public Policy 20 (6): 838–853.

Rubery, Jill. 2002. Gender Mainstreaming and Gender Equality in the EU: The 
Impact of the EU Employment Strategy. Industrial Relations Journal 33 (5): 
500–522.

Rust, Ursula. 2005. Gleichstellung von Mann und Frau. In Die Zukunft der sozi-
alen  Dienste  vor  der  Europäischen  Herausforderung,  ed.  Christine  Linzbach, 
Uwe Lübking, Stephanie Scholz, and Bernd Schulte, 133–151. Baden-Baden: 
Nomos.

Sabatier,  Paul  A.  1998.  The  Advocacy  Coalition  Framework:  Revisions  and 

Relevance for Europe. Journal of European Public Policy 5 (1): 98–130.

———., ed. 1999. Theories of the Policy Process. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

 
68 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

Sabatier,  Paul  A.,  and  Hank  C.  Jenkins-Smith,  eds.  1993.  Policy  Change  and 

Learning: An Advocacy Coalition Approach. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Sainsbury,  Diane.  1996.  Gender,  Equality,  and  Welfare  States.  Cambridge: 

Saurugger,  Sabine.  2014.  Theoretical  Approaches  to  European  Integration. 

Cambridge University Press.

Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Schmidt,  Verena. 

Geschlechtergerechtigkeit 
Frauenforschung und Geschlechterstudien 1: 45–62.

2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming 

als  Leitbild 
in  Organisationsstrukturen.  Zeitschrift 

für 
für 

———.  2005.  Gender  Mainstreaming  -  an  Innovation  in  Europe?  The 
Institutionalisation  of  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Commission. 
Opladen: Barbara Budrich.

Schmidt, Vivien A. 2008. Discursive Institutionalism: The Explanatory Power of 

Ideas and Discourse. Annual Review of Political Science 11: 303–326.

Schmitter, Phillipe C. 1996. Examining the Present Euro-Polity With the Help of 
Past Theories. In Governance in the European Union, ed. Fritz W. Scharpf, Gary 
Marks, Phillipe C. Schmitter, and Wolfgang Streeck, 1–14. London: Sage.

Schunter-Kleemann,  Susanne.  1992.  Geschlechterdifferenz  in  der  politischen 

Debatte zur Europäischen Union. PROKLA 23 (23): 451–472.

———.  1994.  Das  Demokratiedefizit  der  Europäischen  Union  und  die 
Frauenpolitik.  In  Das  unsichtbare  Geschlecht  der  Europa:  der  europäische 
Einigungsprozess aus feministischer Sicht, ed. Elke Biester, 20–38. Frankfurt am 
Main; New York: Campus.

———. 1999. Europäische Geschlechterpolitik - tauglich für das 3. Jahrtausend. 
In Es rettet uns kein höh'res Wesen, ed. Brigitte Stols-Willig and Mechthild Veil, 
138–167. Hamburg: VSA.

Shaw, Jo. 2005. Mainstreaming Equality and Diversity in European Union Law 

and Policy. Current Legal Problems 58: 255–312.

Shepsle, Kenneth A. 2006. Rational Choice Institutionalism. In Oxford Handbook 
of  Political  Institutions,  ed.  Sarah  A.  Binder,  R.A.W.  Rhodes,  and  Bert 
A. Rockman, 23–39. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Smith, Steve. 2001. Social Constructivism and European Studies. In The Social 
Construction of Europe, ed. Thomas Christiansen, Knud Erik Jørgensen, and 
Antje Wiener, 189–198. London: Sage.

Smith, Mark, and Paola Villa. 2010. The Ever-Declining Role of Gender Equality in 
the European Employment Strategy. Industrial Relations Journal 41 (6): 526–543.
Squires, Judith. 1999. Re-thinking the Boundaries of Political Representation. In New 
Agendas for Women, ed. Sylvia Walby, 169–189. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
———.  2005.  Is  Mainstreaming  Transformative?  Theorizing  Mainstreaming  in 

the Context of Diversity and Deliberation. Social Politics 12 (3): 366–388.

Staudt,  Kathleen,  and  Jane  Jacquette.  1988.  Women’s  Programs,  Bureaucratic 
Resistance and Feminist Organisation. In Women, Power and Policy: Towards the 
Year 2000, ed. Ellen Boneparth and Emily Stoper. New York: Pergamon Press.

  REFERENCES 

  69

Stiegler,  Barbara.  2000.  Wie  Gender  in  den  Mainstream  kommt:  Konzepte, 
Argumente  und  Praxisbeispiele  zur  EU-Strategie  des  Gender-Mainstreaming. 
Bonn: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.

Stratigaki, Maria. 2004. The Cooptation of Gender Concepts in EU policies: The 

Case of Reconciliation of Work and Family. Social Politics 11 (1): 30–56.

———. 2005. Gender Mainstreaming vs Positive Action: An On-going Conflict in 
EU Gender Equality Policy. European Journal of Women’s Studies 12 (2): 165–186.
Thelen,  Kathleen,  and  Sven  Steinmo.  1992.  Institutionalism  in  Comparative 
Politics.  In  Structuring  Politics:  Historical  Institutionalism  in  Comparative 
Analysis,  ed.  Kathleen  Thelen,  Sven  Steinmo,  and  Frank  Longstreth,  1–32. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tholoniat, Luc. 2010. The Career of the Open Method of Coordination: Lessons 

from a “Soft” EU Instrument. West European Politics 33 (1): 93–117.

Thompson, John B. 1990. Studies in the Theory of Ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge 

Tsoukalis, Loukas. 1997. The New European Economy Revisited. Oxford: Oxford 

Polity Press.

University Press.

Tucker, Kenneth H. 1998. Anthony Giddens and Modern Social Theory. London: Sage.
Van der Vleuten, Anna. 2007. The Price of Gender Equality: Member States and 

Governance in the European Union. Aldershot: Ashgate.

———. 2012. Gendering the Institutions and Actors of the EU. In Gendering the 
European Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits, ed. Gabriele Abels 
and  Joyce  Marie  Mushaben,  41–62.  Houndmills,  Basingstoke;  New  York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.

Van der Vleuten, Anna, Anouka van Eerdewijk, and Conny Roggeband, eds. 2014. 
Gender  Equality  Norms  in  Regional  Governance:  Transnational  Dynamics  in 
Europe, South America and Southern Africa. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Verloo,  Mieke.  2005.  Displacement  and  Empowerment:  Reflections  on  the 
Concept  and  Practice  of  the  Council  of  Europe  Approach  to  Gender 
Mainstreaming and Gender Equality. Social Politics 12 (3): 344–365.

———.,  ed.  2007.  Multiple  Meanings  of  Gender  Equality:  A  Critical  Frame 
Analysis of Gender Policies in Europe. Budapest; New York: Central European 
University Press.

Vromen,  Ariadne.  2010.  Debating  Methods:  Rediscovering  Qualitative 
Approaches. In Theory and Methods in Political Science, ed. David Marsh and 
Gerry Stoker, 249–266. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Walby, Sylvia. 1990. Theorizing Patriarchy. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 2004. The European Union and Gender Equality: Emergent Varieties of 
Gender  Regimes.  Social  Politics:  International  Studies  in  Gender  State  and 
Society 11 (1): 4–29.

———.  2005.  Gender  Mainstreaming:  Productive  Tensions  in  Theory  and 
Practice. Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society 12 
(3): 321–343.

 
70 

1  INTRODUCTION: EU GENDER EQUALITY POLICY-MAKING

———.  2009.  Globalization  and  Inequalities:  Complexity  and  Contested 

Modernities. Los Angeles: Sage.

Watson, Peggy. 2000. Politics, Policy and Identity: EU Eastern Enlargement and 

East-West Differences. Journal of European Public Policy 7 (3): 369–384.

Waylen,  Georgina.  2007.  Engendering  Transitions:  Women's  Mobilization, 

Institutions and Gender Outcomes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Weingast, Barry R. 1996. Political Institutions: Rational Choice Perspectives. In A 
New  Handbook  of  Political  Science,  ed.  Robert  E.  Goodin  and  Hans-Dieter 
Klingemann, 167–190. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Weiss,  Doris.  1998.  Atypische  Beschäftigung  in  Europa:  Zur  Diskrepanz  von 
Marktrealität und Gesetzgebung der Europäischen Union. In Flexibles Europa: 
die  Auswirkungen  von  Deregulierung  und  Flexibilisierung  europäischer 
Arbeitsmärkte auf die Arbeits- und Lebensbedingungen von Frauen, ed. Doris 
Weiss, 25–60. Frankfurt am Main; New York: P. Lang.

Wobbe,  Theresa,  and  Ingrid  Biermann.  2009.  Von  Rom  nach  Amsterdam.  Die 
Metamorphosen  des  Geschlechts  in  der  Europäischen  Union.  Wiesbaden:  VS 
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Wöhl,  Stefanie.  2008.  Global  Governance  as  Neo-Liberal  Governmentality: 
Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Employment  Strategy.  In  Global 
Governance: Feminist Perspectives, ed. Shirin Rai and Georgina Waylen, 64–83. 
Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Wolffensberger,  Joan.  1991.  Engendered  Structure:  Giddens  and 

the 
Conceptualization  of  Gender.  In  The  Gender  of  Power,  ed.  Kathy  Davis, 
Monique Leijenaar, and Jantine Oldersma, 87–108. London: Sage.

Woodward, Alison E. 1999. Women Acting Rationally: Speaking the Language of 
Power to Gender Test the State. In Rationalisation, Organisation, Gender, ed. 
Monika Goldmann, 133–144. Sozialforschungsstelle Dortmund (sfs): Dortmund.
———.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  European  Policy:  Innovation  or 

Deception? Discussion Paper. Berlin: WZB Berlin.

———. 2004. Building Velvet Triangles: Gender and Informal Governance. In 
Informal Governance in the European Union, ed. Thomas Christiansen, 76–93. 
Cheltenham: Elgar.

———.  2008.  Too  Late  for  Gender  Mainstreaming?  Taking  Stock  in  Brussels. 

Journal of European Social Policy 18 (3): 289–302.

———.  2012.  From  Equal  Treatment  to  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  Diversity 
Management.  In  Gendering  the  European  Union:  New  Approaches  to  Old 
Democratic Deficits, ed. Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 85–103. 
Houndmills, Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Zippel, Kathrin. 2004. Transnational Advocacy Networks and Policy Cycles in the 
European Union: The Case of Sexual Harassment. Social Politics 11 (1): 57–85.

CHAPTER 2

Opening the Black Box: The Adoption 

of the Roadmap over Time

Everyone was interested in developing a successful Roadmap

(Interview with MEP)

How are political actors mobilised? How do they arrive at decisions? And 
where  are  the  decision-making  powers  located?  EU  multi-level  policy- 
making is often seen as an arena with divided competencies, diffusing the 
power of member states by interconnected levels of authority and hetero-
geneous decision-making patterns (Abels 2016: 101f).

If we want to understand decision-making processes in network sub- 
systems  we  need  to  expand  our  focus  beyond  input  and  output  legiti-
macy to throughput legitimacy which is ‘judged in terms of the efficacy, 
accountability and transparency of the EU’s governance processes along 
with  their  inclusiveness  and  openness  to  consultation  with  the  people’ 
(Schmidt 2013: 2).

This chapter examines the elements in the formal and informal policy- 
making processes of negotiating soft law. It unpacks these processes on the 
supranational level and looks at four different actor constellations: (1) the 
internal working procedures of the Commission; (2) its outreach to other 
supranational institutions; (3) interinstitutional groups of representatives 
of  the  Commission  and  member  states  and  (4)  civil  society  in  a  broad 
sense.1

71

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4_272 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

The European Commission as the ‘heart of the Union’ (Nugent 2000) 
holds the right to initiate supranational policies. It is often presented as a 
collective actor with the ability to direct the access of others (Ellinas and 
Suleiman 2012; Richardson 2005; Spence and Edwards 2006). The inter-
nal negotiation processes of the Commission have, however, attracted less 
attention when it comes to throughput legitimacy. We know much about 
formal  rules  and  the  final  outcome  of  policies,  but  the  following  ques-
tions  need  more  attention:  How  do  the  internal  Commission  struggles 
among Directorate Generals (DGs) shape policies? How are they steered 
internally?

Hartlapp et al. (2014) investigated the proposal stage of hard law (e.g. 
directives and regulations) and how the different DGs position themselves 
towards them. They show that compromise does not exist and that three 
typical  positions  are  used  in  the  Commission’s  policy-making  process: 
technocratic,  competence  and  policy-seeking  patterns  (Hartlapp  et  al. 
2014). Most of social policy and the set-up of equality directives between 
2000 and 2010 about gender equality are part of the policy-seeking type. 
It sees the Commission’s negotiations as highly politicised and dependent 
on political convictions and normative policy goals (Hartlapp et al. 2014).
While Hartlapp et al. have illuminated the detailed processes of setting 
up hard law, the formal and informal processes around soft law still remain 
obscure. Compared to hard law (i.e. directives and regulations) the adop-
tion of soft law suffers from a lack of transparency. We know little about 
the internal policy processes within and across institutions, nor about the 
flexible use of formal and informal rules. Thus, soft law procedures, such 
as the important European Commission communications, remain a black 
box  in  EU  integration  literature,  even  though  they  have  become  an 
increasingly potent policy strategy, particularly in gender equality policy 
(Jacquot 2015).

This chapter will explain formal and informal processes of adopting 
Commission communications with a focus on the ‘Roadmap for equality 
between women and men 2006–2010’. I will argue that three parallel 
policy processes led to the Roadmap: the internal Commission process, 
the  interinstitutional  process  between  the  Commission  and  member 
states  and  the  process  outside  of  the  Commission  in  the  European 
Parliament and civil society. Analysing the different patterns in the for-
mation of  positions will help us understand the generation of soft law as 
a vertical (within institutions) and horizontal (between institutions) pol-
ity process.

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME 

  73

The specific internal process of the European Commission for adopting 
communications is a fully formalised process that hardly ever gets atten-
tion from EU researchers. Although the Commission publishes its work-
ing procedures and rules on how it adopts communications (Commission 
decision C(2000) 3614), more detailed information which explains the 
timing and exchange among Commission officials is lacking or remains 
superficial. We also do not know when or to what degree other EU insti-
tutions, such as the Council of the European Union, the Committee of 
the  Regions,  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the 
European  Parliament,  react  to  Commission  communications.  It  is,  for 
instance, unclear when they decide to state an opinion. Even though the 
formal  Commission  policy  process  is  quite  formalised,  actors  do  have 
some leeway for informal manoeuvres that shape the process. Tactics in 
this grey zone often go unnoticed because documentation is lacking; they 
are, however, central to policy adoption.

This  chapter  addresses  details  of  the  formal  and  informal  processes 
within and across institutions. I will start this investigation from the actors’ 
perspective and then proceed with institutional and personal interactions 
when drafting the Commission’s communications. Relying on documen-
tary research and the narratives of all interviewees, this chapter provides a 
comprehensive picture of the actors’ involvement.

DG Employment had the main responsibility for initiating the policy 
process. However, they addressed adoption from the limited perspective 
of their home institution, having very little knowledge about procedural 
details of other institutions involved. Indeed, every actor only had a lim-
ited understanding of the policy process due to their background knowl-
edge and practical experience.

In terms of rules, I will elaborate on the closely interwoven formal and 
informal procedures. This will include reference to all the unavoidable and 
necessary formal obligations in order to publish a Commission communi-
cation and a portrayal of all informal aspects that influenced the prepara-
tion of the Roadmap without necessarily being obligatory.

The  chapter  begins  with  an  explanation  of  the  formal  obligations  to 
publish a Commission communication, followed by a detailed illustration 
of the actors who participated at what time in the adoption process of the 
Roadmap.  The  following  section  takes  a  closer  look  at  the  formal  and 
informal rules and routines that shaped the adoption process.

This close-up reveals that gender equality actors strictly followed stan-
dard EU policy-making rules and combined them with rules derived from 

74 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

the strategy of gender mainstreaming. Both formal and informal proce-
dures were often dependent on strategic decisions based on personal dis-
cussions. I will demonstrate how choosing to publish the Roadmap as a 
Commission  communication  has  consequently  limited  the  number  of 
institutional  actors  involved  in  negotiating  supranational  EU  gender 
equality policy programmes.

2.1 

  AlienAting gender equAlity ProgrAmmes

Who were the actors involved in the internal, external or interinstitutional 
processes?  In  the  internal  process  the  distinct  groups  of  actors  were 
Commission  officials:  the  EP  (European  Parliament),  the  Committee  of 
Regions, the EESC (European Economic and Social Committee). In the 
external process the actors were NGOs, Social Partners and in the interinsti-
tutional process they were the Council, the Advisory Committee on Equal 
Opportunities, as well as the High Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming. 
The adoption of the Roadmap by the Commission was a turning point and 
resulted  in  shifting  responsibilities  by  switching  the  formal  and  informal 
roles of the actors involved. Therefore, the Commission, the Parliamentary 
Committee  on  Women’s  Rights  and  Gender  Equality,  the  European 
Women’s Lobby, the European Trade Union Corporation and the Advisory 
Committee were the main actors in the adoption process.

2.1.1 

  Commission Communications—The Formal Process

The Roadmap was a communication of the Commission and therefore we 
can assume that it was set up in the same way as any other Commission 
communication. A Commission communication is so-called soft law2 and 
not binding for member states. The Commission uses its communications 
for different purposes, e.g. sharing its opinions with member states, as well 
as committing itself to taking further actions in the corresponding policy 
area.  In  general,  communications  convey  the  political  goals  and  future 
policy  plans  of  the  Commission  to  other  actors.  They  are  the  ways  of 
declaring  Commission  positions  and  are  often  used  when  there  are  no 
supranational competencies in a policy area or when there is no opportu-
nity  to  agree  upon  hard  law,  (i.e.  directives,  regulations  or  decisions). 
Contrary to hard law, it is not necessary for any other institution to agree 
upon a communication, as long it does not involve their activities. This 
means  that  when  the  planned  activities  only  concern  the  Commission, 

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  75

other institutions, such as the Council or the European Parliament, can-
not  change  the  communication  text.  This  is  in  contrast  to  adopting  a 
directive or regulation, for instance.

For analytical reasons this aspect of the policy-making process deliber-
ately puts the Commission at the centre of ‘the’ internal process and I 
artificially split the process into three, even though they are in reality inter-
twined. I call the process within Commission divisions internal, while the 
process where the Commission negotiates with representatives of member 
states is called interinstitutional. Finally, I call the process with all other 
actors  who  are  not  directly  involved  in  negotiating  communications 
external.

Communications are adopted in the Commissioners’ College,3 in either 
an oral (during the meeting) or written procedure (before the meeting).4 
Written procedure is allowed if the DGs directly involved with the com-
munication agree with the proposal and the Legal Service endorse it. Like 
any  other  soft  law,  communications  are  not  published  in  the  Official 
Journal of the European Communities.

Other European institutions, such as the European Parliament or the 
Council, receive Commission communications via a standardised formal 
procedure,  following  their  adoption  by  the  Commissioners’  College. 
Subsequently, the other institutions initiate their own formal procedure of 
adopting a common opinion or resolution5 on the Commission’s com-
munication. Each institution has a specific procedure on how to handle 
Commission communications, including the announcement of a member 
or group who is responsible for reporting on the communication from the 
perspective of his or her home institution. The process is relatively similar 
in  the  European  Parliament,  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  and  the 
European Economic and Social Committee. By contrast, the Council has 
its own rules, usually deciding whether to put a communication as an A or 
B item in council meetings.6 This classification influences how much room 
for  debate  there  is  on  a  given  communication.  The  process  in  these 
European institutions is accompanied by the attendance of a Commission 
member, usually someone from the unit who is responsible for the com-
munication at stake.

At  present  we  know  surprisingly  little  about  the  specific  steps  in  the 
Commission’s  internal  process  when  adopting  communications,  as  this 
institutional process is rarely researched. Although the Commission itself 
publishes its working procedures and rules on how Commission commu-
nications  are  adopted  (Commission  decision  C(2000)  3614),  their 

76 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

accounts of the timing and exchange between internal and external actors 
are quite general.

The interservice consultation is one of the notable internal procedures 
that recently gained attention with regard to decision-making procedures 
in the Commission (Hartlapp et al. 2013). The interservice consultation 
can  best  be  understood  as  an  institutionalised  intranet-based  discussion 
platform for commenting, amending or even rejecting proposals by one 
(or more) DG. All DGs have to give their opinion on a proposal within ten 
to fifteen days. If there are no reservations the procedure moves on to the 
next  stage:  to  the  Head  of  Cabinets  who  prepares  the  meetings  of  the 
Commissioners’ College.

Apart from the formal process among the EU institutions we know that 
there are various interest groups in each policy area that try to influence 
the content of Commission proposals through informal processes before 
they are adopted (Coen and Richardson 2009). They do so by lobbying, 
such as sending policy papers to EU institutions, publishing statements 
and press releases, participating in hearings or conferences and through 
networking.

Tracing the adoption of the Roadmap back to the policy-making pro-
cess is important, as decisions by different actors are based on their avail-
able  choices  and  can  cause  unintended  consequences.  This  analysis 
investigates questions like: Which structural aspects were constraining and 
which were enabling? When were actors able or unable to influence oth-
ers? Where did they miss opportunities? Or according to Giddens: Where 
did actors reproduce the ‘factivity’ of the institutional order?

2.1.2 

  Setting Up the Roadmap Communication 

in the Commission

The process of setting up the Roadmap started in early 2005, more than a 
year before its adoption. An early sign of a new policy programme was a 
reference in the newly adopted social agenda of the Commission: ‘as the 
current framework strategy 2000–2005 comes to an end, the Commission will 
draw up a communication on future policy developments proposing action in 
order to tackle these weaknesses7’. Around this time, José Manuel Barroso, 
the President of the Commission, also decided upon the future name of 
‘Roadmap’ rather than ‘framework’, as a Commission official reported:

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  77

He  [José  Manuel  Barroso]  was  the  one  who  decided,  I  mean,  the  name 
‘Roadmap’ came from him. But the decision to have a document was already 
there.  There  was  a  commitment  by  the  Commission  in  the  social  agenda. 
(Commission official 6:49)

With  the  appointment  of  the  new  Commission,  Barroso  was  under 
strong pressure to deliver legislation on equal treatment after the so-called 
Buttiglione scandal. The nominated Italian Commissioner openly showed 
his homophobic convictions and after being turned down, the EP pres-
sured  Barroso  to  prove  his  commitment  to  equal  treatment  (Hartlapp 
et al. 2014: 77). As a result, Barroso pushed DG Employment to revising 
gender equality directives. The attentive EP probably also incited further 
activities, at least in some form of window dressing, as the analysis high-
lights below.

In early March 2005, the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment 
initiated a first meeting of the Commission’s internal interservice group 
on gender equality with the aim of agreeing on the basic structure of the 
new policy programme and inviting contributions from all Commission 
DGs. Formal meetings of the interservice group usually took place around 
three to four times a year. The first meeting for the Roadmap was different 
from the usual ones, as DG Employment invited the top level (directors 
and heads of units) and not, as usual, members at the lower level of the 
group. The central idea was to gain commitment from the top:

(…) instead of calling a meeting with the officials in charge of gender equality 
we alerted the DGs at the Director General level in advance,[advising them] 
that we were preparing this Roadmap and that they should really be involved 
and that their contributions would be required. (…) the first meeting we had 
in the interservice group was either with the Heads or Directors of the units. So 
it was a very important meeting because we really had the first structure in 
mind, which is basically what is now the Roadmap. (Commission official 6:22)

This means that the outline of the Roadmap8 was already the final ver-
sion as described in Chap. 1, including six chapters with priority areas of 
action, annexes on (I) progress indicators, (II) gender equality governance 
structure inside the Commission, and (III) equal opportunities between 
men and women in the Commission working staff (European Commission 
2006).

 
78 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

In  the  summer  of  2005  the  whole  process  proceeded  with  different 
DGs  delivering  their  part  of  the  Roadmap,  while  the  Gender  Equality 
Unit in DG Employment was responsible for drafting the Roadmap’s out-
line, as well as coordinating the process and contributions. The usual for-
mal  meetings  of  the  interservice  group  on  gender  equality  took  place 
throughout this process. In addition, the Gender Equality Unit of DG 
Employment  exchanged  a  vast  number  of  emails  with  individual  DGs 
which contributed to the Roadmap.

(…) The communication itself was prepared by DG Employment; of course they 
discussed  it  within  this  interservice  group  and  we  were  there.  (Commission 
official 1:65)

And then it was written up. It was in 2006, and I was working on it for six 
months … And then we started to work, really by email, on the text proposed by 
[name], and then amended by us after discussions with [name]. (Commission 
official 17:106)

A: For us, it was the dialogue with DG Employment. Among us and then the 
dialogue with DG Employment.
Q: And that’s all inside the interservice group then?
A: Interservice group and between the contacts, we continued the discussions 
and we were sending document by email and making comments, so it was not 
just the meetings of the interservice group.
Q: But an ongoing process on an everyday basis?
A: Yes. (Commission official 19:114–118)

While the different DGs prepared their contributions to the Roadmap, 
the Gender Equality Unit in DG Employment collected documents from 
external actors and examined the political positions of the parliamentary 
Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality, the Social Partners 
and the European Women’s Lobby in order to calibrate them with the 
draft Roadmap:

The other thing that we really looked at was all the reports by parliament on 
gender  equality  and  the  various  subjects,  like  reconciliation  or  other  things. 
(…) we had a specific provision in the Roadmap on gender budgeting, and of 
course one of the issues was that parliament was pushing a lot for that. (…) We 
also had a representative of social partners because I forgot to say that in 2005 
the  social  partners  had  an  action  plan  on  gender  equality.  (…)  So  another 

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  79

contribution that we used to see what was the priorities for social partners and 
how  to  really  link  them  to  what  we  were  doing.  (…).  (Commission  official 
6:22, 36)

In terms of the overall process the increased digitalisation of the work-
ing  life  had  a  strong  impact.  When  drafting  the  Roadmap  most  of  the 
exchanges consisted of web-based research by the actors who were exter-
nal to the Commission, such as NGOs. Even inside the Commission most 
of the exchanges were via email and not face-to-face. This change in com-
munication reveals an important factor in comparison to the times of the 
‘velvet  triangle’  when  most  of  the  communication  relied  on  personal 
exchanges of a closed community (Jacquot 2015). As we will see in the 
next chapter, the de-personalised drafting process resulted in a less emo-
tional  anchoring  of  the  Roadmap  than  was  the  case  in  previous  policy 
programmes.

In  November  2005  the  first  draft  was  finalised  and  the  internal  and 
formal  adoption  process  of  the  Commission  started.  One  Commission 
official noted that those in charge would actually risk the success of their 
proposal if they started the formal procedure without taking into account 
the positions of other DGs involved:

A: (…) if you go through the interservice consultation then it’s very difficult to 
solve problems, if you have big problems.
Q: So you have to solve them in advance.
A:  Because  what  happens  in  the  interservice  consultation  is,  they  block  your 
document if they are not happy. And then you have to go into negotiations … 
because it’s a formal negotiation. (Commission official 6:111)

While the various DGs contributed to their part of the Roadmap, the 
Gender Equality Unit fulfilled the formal obligation of conducting an 
impact  assessment  and  created  a  working  group  which  consisted  of 
selected  civil  servants  responsible  for  gender  equality.  The  internal 
impact assessment9 was annexed and published on the same day as the 
Roadmap:

For instance, for the Roadmap we needed to have the impact assessment and for 
the impact assessment, of course, we had to create a working group which had 
both people internal to DG [Employment] but also people from the outside; not 

80 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

all of the DGs, but some of the most—let’s say—relevant DGs. (Commission 
official 6:120)

According to another Commission official, an additional impact assess-
ment was carried out by a private consultancy before entering the formal 
interservice consultation:

DG Employment appointed a private consultancy to make the first assessment of 
the Roadmap. (Commission official 17:86)

On the other hand, the formal procedure involved the communication 
being  sent  through  the  different  hierarchical  levels  in  the  so-called 
‘interservice  consultation’  and  to  the  so-called  ‘supervision  DGs’.  For 
example, the Legal Service checked whether the communication was con-
sistent with the treaties. Finally, the communication was adopted by the 
Commissioners’ College. The final internal adoption by the Commission 
occurred without any further discussion. It was adopted almost without 
being noticed and the document was not in ‘oral procedure’, according to 
a cabinet member who attended the meeting (Interview 4). During my 
interview the cabinet member checked when exactly and by what proce-
dure  the  Roadmap  was  adopted  because  s/he  did  not  remember  the 
Roadmap being an element of the Commission’s gender equality policy. 
This means that the Roadmap communication was not tabled or discussed 
and was not a critical item on the agenda of the Commissioners’ College. 
This demonstrates that the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment was 
very effective in making use of the internal Commission’s interservice con-
sultation and the informal exchange beforehand in order to organise broad 
support for the Roadmap. Only items that cause controversy are discussed 
in the Commissioners’ College (Hartlapp et al. 2014). The Roadmap was 
not  controversial.  It  was  accepted  by  all  DGs  before  arriving  at  the 
Commissioners’ College.

The Roadmap was adopted on 1st March 2006 and presented to the 
public on 8th March 2006, International Women’s Day. Subsequently, the 
formal  process  continued  outside  the  Commission  in  the  European 
Parliament, the European Council, the Committee of the Regions and the 
European Economic and Social Committee. Various interviewees empha-
sised that only DG Employment members represented the Commission in 
official meetings with the other European institutions. For instance, it was 
only DG Employment who replied10 to the European Parliament  resolution 

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  81

in 2007. Commission officials from other DGs did not participate in the 
formal  process  of  the  other  EU  institutions,  despite  the  fact  that  the 
Roadmap is not solely a communication of DG Employment. This aspect 
is  explained  in  more  detail  in  Chap.  3  as  a  sign  of  ‘wrong  ownership’. 
Nonetheless, Commission officials commonly knew about the next proce-
dural steps:

There  was  policy  work  to  be  done,  because  when  the  communication  went 
through, for example, then you had to go to the Council and Parliament to 
discuss and get a resolution. (Commission official 7:34)

Even before completing the adoption process in the other EU institu-
tions, as detailed below, the Commission organised a conference with a 
variety of actors on 4th–5th May 2006 in order to present the Roadmap 
to a larger public.11 Representatives of the Commission, the EP, member 
states, trade unions, multinational enterprises and (trans)national NGOs 
commented on the Roadmap and exchanged their views on the different 
parts. The report of the conference, written by the Commission, creates 
the  impression  that  everyone  welcomed  and  appreciated  the  Roadmap 
without any criticism.

2.1.3 

  Commission Outreach: Informal and Formal Procedures

Alongside the formal procedure leading to the adoption of the Roadmap 
inside the Commission, there was an additional process on the outside: an 
informal  process  involving  EU  institutions,  such  as  the  European 
Parliament and the Council, as well as non-governmental actors, including 
trade unions and women’s organisations.12 The external process did not 
end with the adoption of the Roadmap by the Commission; rather, the 
adoption  worked  more  like  a  turning  point  between  two  different,  yet 
interconnected, external processes. Until the adoption by the Commission, 
activities  on  the  outside  were  informal.  After  the  adoption,  the  process 
automatically became formal for other European institutions and Social 
Partners  and  non-governmental  actors  occasionally  participated  in  this 
formal process. The following section will discuss the entire process, span-
ning the informal and formal parts of the adoption process, external to the 
Commission.

Just like the internal Commission process, the external process started 
more than one year in advance. According to the Commission, members 

 
82 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

of the Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality (FEMM) held 
an 
informal  meeting  with  Commission  President  Barroso  and 
Commissioner Špidla in March 2005, where they stressed their concern 
that gender equality policy would lose impetus.

(…) the idea of having a Roadmap was put forward by Barroso in the meeting 
we had with some representatives of the women’s rights committee of parlia-
ment.  Because  they  were  concerned  about  the  fact  that  gender  equality  was 
lacking this ability and was losing momentum and so on and so forth. So the 
promise of the president was to come up with a Roadmap on gender equality, 
and then, that this Roadmap would cover all the policies. (Commission official 
6:44)

The European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) took advantage of 
its own structure of women’s committees to establish frequent informal 
exchanges with Commission officials during the drafting of the Roadmap:

We  invited  representatives  from  the  Commissioner’s  office  and  from  DG 
Employment  to  our  women’s  committee  meetings  at  all  the  different  stages 
when the Roadmap was in its infancy. So the whole kind of pre-stage is: all the 
drafts and then the final outcome. And then in-between we had informal meet-
ings with our different contacts and tried to influence along the way informally 
and then formally through consultation, and as I said, through meetings with 
our women’s committee on the content. But I mean … there are also personal 
contacts that play quite a strong role at the Brussels level. And I mean we have 
very good relations with the person, one of the people in the Commissioner’s office 
in charge of this. (Trade Union official 31:106)

The important role of personal contacts in EU gender equality policy 
was  highlighted  by  Woodward  (2004)  and  Jacquot  (2015)  who  both 
stressed the positive aspects of committed people who work together for 
the same cause. They also pointed out the downside, the ‘ghettoisation’ 
(Woodward 2001) of gender equality and the lack of exchanges with other 
actors. Surprisingly, Commission officials never mentioned such an infor-
mal exchange and only mentioned the analysis of the documents by exter-
nal actors:

There are also the social partners, but (…) what we did was to take what they 
had. You know, it’s the same for the European Parliament. It’s not like we had 
an exchange with them, but we had an analysis of all the most important docu-
ments and that was it. (Commission official 6:177)

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  83

Nonetheless, the European trade union was the only external actor that 
affirmed frequent informal exchanges with the Commission by using its 
own procedures. NGOs and member state representatives predominantly 
approached the Commission or one of its DGs selectively, while the other 
EU  institutions  (EP,  Council,  EESC,  CoR)  waited  with  their  opinions 
until they had received the final version of the Roadmap. Both approaches 
are routine procedures for the respective actors.

The European Women’s Lobby (EWL) organised its activities accord-
ing to its internal procedures and network contacts, while frequent infor-
mal exchanges with the Commission, as reported by the trade union, were 
not mentioned. The network contacts of the EWL included other non- 
governmental actors, MEPs and even individual representatives of mem-
ber  states.  According  to  the  EWL,  they  already  started  their  lobbying 
activities  in  October  2004,  based  upon  a  decision  of  their  General 
Assembly13 to propose a ‘shadow Roadmap’ by consulting their member 
organisations on the content (including a feedback loop) from March to 
June 2005. They adopted their shadow Roadmap in the General Assembly 
and presented the final version at the end of October 2005 (Civil Society 
Contact Group 2006: 17). Not surprisingly, the EWL’s shadow Roadmap 
went  far  beyond  the  final  Commission  document  and  suggested  many 
specific points for various parts of the Roadmap (Ahrens 2007). Also, the 
EWL  recommended  additional  hard  law  in  the  form  of  directives,  for 
example, affordable childcare and gender equality in education curricula. 
Furthermore, it included more innovative suggestions, such as institution-
alising a reporting instrument on gender-specific analysis of finance and 
trade policies for the annual spring Council, transferring the Open Method 
of Coordination to childcare policies or developing rules for gender equal-
ity in WTO policies (European Women’s Lobby 2005). Why did none of 
these suggestions make it into the final Commission communication? The 
reasons will be discussed in the following chapters.

Among  the  NGOs,  the  EWL  made  particular  use  of  the  so-called 
‘Gender Lunch’, an informal, yet firmly institutionalised meeting of NGOs 
and other actors interested in supporting EU gender equality policy. The 
Gender  Lunch  can  be  described  as  the  civil  society  counterpart  of 
 institutionalised  EU  groups,  such  as  the  FEMM  (Women’s  Rights  and 
Gender Equality Committee) and the Commission interservice group on 
gender  equality.  The  EWL  also  implicitly  implemented  gender  main-
streaming rules by involving the actors usually involved in policy-making. 

84 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

The Gender Lunch was organised in an informal way and, contrary to the 
FEMM committee or the Commission’s interservice group, the participat-
ing organisations worked on an equal footing and alternated in organising 
meetings. According to my interviewees, the responsibilities for organis-
ing  changed  depending  on  the  topic  and  the  presenters.  The  Gender 
Lunch  was  an  initiative  of  civil  society  organisations  and  also  aimed  to 
develop  or  maintain  contacts  with  Commission  DGs  and  other  EU 
institutions.

In this context the European Women’s Lobby worked as an informa-
tion hub, a platform to distribute and exchange information and to mobil-
ise  other  actors  to  get  involved  in  influencing  the  Commission.  Other 
NGOs,  like  the  European  Youth  Forum,  were  contacted  to  exchange 
content-related views:

At  that  point  there  was  some  cooperation  going  on  between  the  European 
Women’s Lobby and the European Youth Forum on young woman basically, so 
gender equality and young people. (NGO representative 16:62)

But what happened was that the European Women’s Lobby had their own ini-
tiative and their own analysis of the Roadmap and they decided to share it with 
other people. (NGO representative 18:22)

(…)  they  [European  Women’s  Lobby]  came  with  information  we  did  not 
have, and we came with our information. It was a question of exchanging 
information and pushing some points on the agenda that could be very good; 
and we could help them with some things too. (Member state representative 
28:148)

The European Women’s Lobby used this information exchange and 
networking to collect input for their policy paper ‘Gender Equality Road 
Map for the European Community 2006–2010’, the so-called ‘shadow 
Roadmap’ published in November 2005.14 The policy paper was not only 
distributed widely among the network members, it was also sent to those 
responsible  for  the  Roadmap  inside  DG  Employment.  As  discussed  in 
Chap. 3 in relation to the ‘closed door’, the EWL saw no other possibil-
ity  to  influence  DGs  other  than  DG  Employment  through  other 
channels.

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  85

During  the  whole  drafting  process  of  the  Roadmap  the  EWL  stated 
that  they  used  different  times  and  spaces  for  putting  pressure  on  the 
Commission regarding the new policy programme:

A: We were asking them all the time, in every speech, in every meeting: Where 
are you with the new strategy? etc.
Q: And who was the contact then, who did you contact?
A: Everybody. Well, at different levels, writing to the Commissioners, or when 
we met with the Gender Equality Unit, or in the Advisory Committee, or … 
(NGO representative 29:108–110)

The  EWL  shadow  Roadmap  is  the  only  policy  paper  by  a  non- 
governmental  actor  that  was  published  and  distributed  before  the 
Roadmap was adopted. The shadow Roadmap was widely acknowledged 
and recalled by a variety of actors I interviewed:

(…) we also worked with the European Lobby of Women and I would suggest 
you go to them because they prepared a sort of shadow paper. (MEP 10:30)

(…) it was spontaneous, (…) this is the largest platform for women’s organisa-
tions, so they had a contribution that they gave to us, it’s not that we asked them 
for a contribution… (Commission official 33:36)

The term ‘spontaneous’, used by the Commission official, revealed that 
the Commission was not aware that the EWL had already decided in 2004 
on lobbying activities regarding the Roadmap. Moreover, the Commission 
official only had limited knowledge about the EWL workings, as did the 
EWL about the Commission routines.

While MEPs from the Women’s Rights and Gender Equality Committee 
(FEMM),  the  European  Trade  Union  Confederation  (ETUC)  and  the 
European Women’s Lobby (EWL) became active in order to influence the 
drafting of the Roadmap inside the Commission, the other EU institutions 
(Council of the European Union, Committee of the Regions, European 
Economic  and  Social  Committee),  the  European  Parliament  and  other 
actors from civil society were not involved in the informal process:

Q: They [the Commission] did not contact the social committee of Coreper in 
advance?
A: No, they did not.

86 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

Q: So, they handed in the final draft, or the adopted one, or…?
A: They already came with the adopted version by the College of Commissioners. 
By the time they came to us it was in fact at a very late stage. (Council repre-
sentative 5:53–56)

Q: What I would be interested in is: how did you participate in the development 
of the Roadmap?
A: In the development:—zero. (EP official 23:146)

But  none  of  them  [other  NGOs  apart  from  the  EWL]  were  involved  in  the 
Roadmap. For example, we are members of the European platform of social 
NGOs, we are members of the European Civil Society contact group, and then 
we have bilateral contacts with members of others, but they were not involved in 
the Roadmap. What we did was to provide them with information about what 
was going on. And that’s what they do for example when the gender equality 
working group of the AGE Platform has a meeting. I am sometimes invited to 
speak  about  whatever  happens.  But  they  were  not  involved  in  the  Roadmap 
process. (NGO representative 29:172)

2.1.4 

  Considering Member States Interests

There is a third process connected with drafting the Roadmap, one that is 
neither clearly internal nor external to the Commission. This third process 
includes  so-called 
interinstitutional  groups,  such  as  the  Advisory 
Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men and the High 
Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming. The former consists of represen-
tatives  of  member  states  and  representatives  of  the  European  Women’s 
Lobby and Social Partners. Meanwhile, the High Level Groups only com-
prise representatives of member states, sometimes the same ones as in the 
Advisory  Committee,  sometimes  different  ones.  This  often  depends  on 
the size of the member state and the availability of their civil servants, or 
on the responsibilities for different tasks in member states. For instance, in 
Germany the civil servant who participates in the Advisory Committee is 
responsible  for  EU  policies  and  gender  aspects,  while  the  civil  servant 
from  the  High  Level  Group  comes  from  a  different  ministry  and  is 
 responsible for German gender equality policy. In contrast, the Belgian 
representatives for both groups work for the same institution.

Just  like  the  other  two  processes,  the  interinstitutional  process  also 
started  one  year  before.  Member  state  representatives  and  Commission 

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  87

officials  reported  that  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG  Employment 
tabled the idea of the next policy programme, asking for the views of the 
committee’s members.

The first thing we did was to ask the Committee, the Advisory Committee to 
have an opinion on the future gender equality strategy. (…) It was almost one 
year before. (Commission official 6:16)

I  know  that  there  was  advice  from  different  bodies,  of  course  the  European 
Women’s Lobby, the groups that I have mentioned earlier were also advising the 
Commission, the High Level Group, the Advisory Committee. (Commission 
official 33:58)

What I can tell you is that the two groups which have taken part are the High 
Level Group and Advisory Committee. (Member state representative 28:56)

According to an Advisory Committee representative, the Commission 
sent a draft before the regular meeting. This was discussed in the meeting 
before the Commission revised its draft. A new draft was then sent prior 
to  the  next  meeting  (Interview  8,  member  state  representative).  In 
November  2005,  the  Advisory  Committee  provided  its  own  opinion,15 
addressing all parts of the Roadmap from the perspective of the member 
states. This was taken into account for the Commission’s internal impact 
assessment.

The High Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming was not involved, 
their members only reported that they had been informed about the draft-
ing process without being involved as a forum (Interviews 6 & 28, mem-
ber  state  representatives).  However,  Commission  officials  mentioned  a 
clear  connection  between  the  Roadmap  and  the  ‘European  Pact  for 
Gender Equality’ that was adopted at the Spring European Council on 
March 23rd/24th 200616:

We  are  following  up  the  commitment  of  the  member  states.  (…)  when  the 
Commission had proposed the Roadmap, this was followed up by the European 
Pact for gender equality. And the European Pact for gender equality I think 
started by recognising the role of the Roadmap and so on, so there was a form of 
interaction in-between, I mean the broad objective (…) DG Employment is 
(…) organising the work of the High Level Group for gender equality, with 

88 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

representatives of member states and of course there they are discussing those 
issues that I’ve just mentioned (…). (Commission official 33:28)

Therefore the interinstitutional process followed the typical routines set 
up for the two groups and was used to reconcile Commission positions 
with member state positions. The quotes also reveal that the tasks of the 
two groups did indeed line up with their formal purpose: the Advisory 
Committee was asked to provide feedback to the Commission proposal 
(the Roadmap communication), while the High Level Group was used as 
a platform to discuss member state activities.

2.1.5 

  The Post-Adoption Policy Process

After the adoption of the Roadmap in the Commission the number and 
composition of the actors who were involved in the Roadmap policy pro-
cess changed. The Council, the Committee of the Regions, the European 
Economic and Social Committee and the European Parliament began to 
fulfil their formal obligations. When the Commission publishes a commu-
nication,  all  the  other  EU  institutions  react  by  giving  an  opinion.  The 
Committee of the Regions, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the European Parliament appoint rapporteurs from the responsible 
organisational sections and require the adoption of a joint opinion by the 
whole institution. Giving an opinion does not mean any changes to the 
Commission’s version of the Roadmap would or could be adopted, as the 
format as a Commission communication meant that the Roadmap was not 
subject to negotiation (except within the Commission DGs). Therefore, 
giving an opinion involves the other actors expressing whether their stand-
point  is  similar  or  different  compared  to  the  Commission’s  document. 
Moreover, they can also express expectations regarding implementation, 
missing elements (e.g. topics, legislative acts) or aspects they would like 
excluded. The adopted opinion normally does not completely contradict 
the Commission’s communication, which is understandable when consid-
ering  the  policy  process  that  leads  to  the  adoption  of  the  Roadmap. 
Accordingly, almost every actor was, to some extent, taken into account 
during the drafting process of the Roadmap.

The European Economic and Social Committee published its opinion 
on 13th September 2006.17 The gender study group of the Section for 
Employment, Social Affairs and Citizenship which was responsible for pre-
paring the opinion within the EESC found a consensus between the three 

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  89

groups  (employers,  trade  unions,  civil  society).  This  was  followed  by 
unanimous vote. The whole process was accompanied by a Commission 
official:

We wanted to make sure, as we usually do within this ESC committee, that we 
have a consensus from the different groups of society. Besides, even at the very 
beginning  when  we  had  our  first  meeting,  we  had  the  representatives  of  the 
Commission who specifically worked on gender equality, who were with us dur-
ing the discussion of the Commission document, elaborating and explaining 
what actually is meant and they helped us with reaching a conclusion. (EESC 
representative 27:7)

Similarly, the Committee of the Regions (CoR) published the opinion18 
by its Commission for Economic and Social Policy on December 6, 2006. 
It  was  passed  unanimously  following  the  usual  process.  Obviously  the 
‘assistance’ of the Commission to other EU institutions helped to reach a 
consensus, an aspect of great importance in EU policies.

At Council level the Roadmap was already scheduled for the Council 
meeting of ‘Employment, Social Policy, Health and Consumer Affairs’ 
on March 10, 2006. The Roadmap was scheduled as a ‘B item’ in the 
meeting and, according to a Council representative, there was a minor 
debate:

The Roadmap was one point, and the different ministers of equal opportunities 
could come in and tell the Commission that they were very happy with this new 
proposal.  Or  they  said,  yes,  it’s  very  good,  but  unfortunately  this  or  another 
point is missing. (Council representative 5:24)

Similar to the CoR and the EESC process, a representative from the 
Commission attended the Council meeting in order to directly react to 
comments. Interestingly, the Roadmap was not the only item on gender 
equality  policy,  as  the  ‘European  Pact  for  Gender  Equality19’  was  also 
tabled.

In the European Parliament the Committee on Women’s Rights and 
Gender Equality (FEMM) was responsible for giving an opinion on the 
Roadmap and setting up a resolution as an own-initiative report. On 8th 
March 2006, directly after the Commission adopted the Roadmap, the 
FEMM  committee  had  a  so-called  ‘exchange  of  views  with  VIPs’  with 
thirteen different Commissioners and the Commission President.20 The 

 
90 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

list  of  attending  Commissioners  is  puzzling:  while  some  were  expected 
due  to  their  well-known  commitment  to  the  subject,  such  as  Margot 
Wallström and Neelie Kroes, or because of the tradition of gender equality 
policy in their policy areas, like Vladimir Špidla (Employment), Danuta 
Hübner  (Regional  Policy),  Janez  Potočnik  (Science  &  Research)  other 
core  policy  areas,  like  Enterprise  &  Industry,  Internal  Market,  Trade, 
Health and Development were not represented.

According to an EP official, Commissioner Špidla also met informally 
with  individual  MEPs  of  the  FEMM  committee  in  preparation  of  the 
Commission’s Roadmap adoption. The purpose was gaining support for 
different parts of the Roadmap:

The Commissioner saw them in one week (…) one hour each. So what he would 
do is present the Roadmap: ‘Yes, these are my priorities. I would like to have 
your support in this and that’ and then go to another until he’d have a certain 
number. He was clever in asking the support based on the personal interests of 
each member. It’s normal, it’s political practice. It’s nothing special. It always 
looks ugly when we start to explain it. Then you say: ‘It’s politics’. And it’s easy. 
But that was his strategy to gather support. (EP official 23:192–194)

This move was a way of de-politicising the Roadmap adoption, a strategic 
decision that demonstrated the Commission’s understanding about formal 
and informal rules in the European Parliament.21 Aiming for consensus dom-
inates the formal and informal working practices in the EP. The Commissioner 
implicitly  mobilised  this  by  asking  the  support  for  different  parts  of  the 
Roadmap, a move that signalled consensus as a goal. Not discussing political 
goals regarding gender equality de-politicises policy processes, because those 
involved stop questioning defined goals or reviewing the overall package. By 
splitting the support requirement into smaller pieces, political confrontation 
was  avoided.  The  de-politicising  move  will  be  discussed  in  further  detail 
when examining the interpretation of the policy process.

As usual, one rapportrice—Amalia Sartori, EPP and a shadow rappor-
trice, Pia Elda Locatelli, SPE—was assigned to the own-initiative report 
on the Roadmap. In addition six other committees22 were appointed to 
provide opinions and amendments. Amalia Sartori started a series of infor-
mal  meetings  with  different  actors,  including  the  European  Women’s 
Lobby:

We had a meeting with the rapporteur. She was drafting [the EP resolution] … 
But that was afterwards [after the Commission’s adoption]. And that was also 

2.1  ALIENATING GENDER EQUALITY PROGRAMMES 

  91

informal, we were not consulted in a formal way. And she was actually consult-
ing with a number of different organisations. (NGO representative 29:159)

Other  MEPs  stressed  the  necessity  of  frequently  meeting  informally 
with other actors when preparing own-initiative reports (Interview 3:104). 
An EP official explained that informal meetings also serve the purpose of 
organising the formal procedures within the EP:

When I am assigned a report or an opinion, first of all it’s about establishing a 
schedule and in that respect I already come in contact with some interlocutors. 
I cannot draw up schedule on my own. I need to see if some other committees 
provide opinions, I need to see if the schedule can be fitted into the schedules of 
the translation unit. We have to respect the time frame. I need to see if the sched-
ule fits into the plenary agenda and of course I need to see if the members agree. 
Because the members can also decide not to be there on that date, so… the first 
step  is  fixing  the  schedule  and  this  already  implies  some  negotiation.  (EP 
official 23:32)

On  4th  October  2006  the  FEMM  committee  used  an  EP  standard 
procedure to organise a mini-hearing during its regular meeting on the 
Roadmap. They invited representatives from DG Employment and DG 
Justice, the rapporteur of the EESC and a member state representative to 
present their views.

The EP resolution23 on the Roadmap was adopted with one dissenting 
vote out of 28 in the committee on 24th January 2007 and in the EP ple-
nary  on  13th  March  2007—more  than  one  year  after  the  Commission 
adopted the Roadmap communication. This means that the EP resolution 
was the last formal opinion provided by EU institutions, a long time after 
all other EU institutions had published their opinion. Those who prepared 
the final voting changed the usual procedure for the Roadmap resolution:

The process of the Roadmap was the best exercise because we had 150 amendments 
in total, something like that. And we decided to completely reshuffle the resolution 
by topics and under each theme [there was] a compromise or a leading amend-
ment. (…) So the work was to re-focus the thing and the trick was that in the 
voting list—something that we never do and never did afterwards is to include 
the topic—between the amendments we put: ‘Ok, violence against women. This is 
the compromise, while this text section will be deleted.’ They could see the original 
words and the comments. When you see a voting list for a complete text, you are 
sometimes indecisive because you don’t see the topic, so by doing that, by keeping 
the original and the comments, we made it acceptable. (EP official 23:208)

92 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

The necessity to ‘re-focus’ and put the topics between the amendments 
is understandable when considering that six other committees were asked 
for opinions. Four of them provided a total of 7424 amendments, request-
ing the FEMM committee to include them in the final resolution, while 
the FEMM was also preparing 38 amendments (often with several sub- 
items). Those in charge of presenting the resolution ready for a vote chose 
to combine the amendments and present the integrated version with sub- 
headings  in  order  to  simplify  reaching  committee  positions.  This  is  an 
unusual procedure for the EP. The process of drafting and adopting the 
Roadmap ended with the final resolution of the EP and the Commission’s 
response.

2.2 

  rules, routines And Actor constellAtions 

over time

How  did  the  formal  and  informal  process,  formal  obligations,  strategic 
decisions  and  the  various  institutions  interconnect  in  the  case  of  the 
Roadmap? In order to provide a clear picture I will approach the descrip-
tion of the policy process by focusing on each step of the Roadmap’s draft-
ing  process.  Activities  of  DG  Employment,  more  specifically  Unit  G1 
‘Equality  between  Women  and  Men’,  the  Gender  Equality  Unit,  were 
central. According to my interviewees DG Employment was the so-called 
leading Directorate General and its Gender Equality unit had the task of 
coordinating the drafting of the Roadmap.

Even though gender mainstreaming was often presented as a transfor-
mative strategy, it was this strategy in particular that contributed most to 
defuse conflict in the European Commission by allowing topics to become 
uncontroversial. Showing how the Gender Equality Unit played with for-
mal  and  informal  rules  and  employed  external  pressure  when  necessary 
will highlight how this defusing was implemented.

Who and what determines the final outcome of soft law? The tim-
ing of events in the policy process, the stream of interventions by dif-
ferent  actors  and  the  way  actors  use  rules  and  resources  in  their 
interaction.  In  this  respect,  the  actors  who  actively  participated  in 
policy-making  and  those  who  participated  in  the  background  are  of 
particular interest.

In summary, the analysis of the policy process timeline leads to a dis-

tinction between the following aspects:

2.2  RULES, ROUTINES AND ACTOR CONSTELLATIONS OVER TIME 

  93

Rules

 1.  By choosing a non-legislative Commission communication as the legal 
form of the Roadmap all further steps guided the participation of inter-
nal and external actors.

 2.  The  Commission  rules  of  procedure  and  the  obligation  to  gender 

mainstreaming collide in terms of actors’ participation.

 3.  Actors external to the Commission developed their own distinct rules 

of procedure with regard to Commission communications.

Actor constellation

 1.  The  Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG  Employment  was  the  only 
Commission actor contacted by institutions and organisations, other 
than the Commission.

 2.  Inside  the  Commission  the  interservice  group  on  gender  equality 
formed a well-functioning network, despite the varied involvement of 
DGs.

 3.  During  the  drafting  and  adoption  process  there  was  no  overarching 
policy network where EU gender equality policy actors from different 
institutions collaborated.

 4.  Actors external to the Commission started to publicise content- related 
subjects  after  the  Roadmap  draft  was  almost  finalised  inside  the 
Commission.

2.2.1 

  Rules and Routines over Time

As described in the previous section, the Commission rules prescribe how 
the  procedures  among  different  DGs  are  set  up  by  the  so-called  lead 
Directorate General. DG Employment was the lead DG for the Roadmap 
due to the history of gender equality policy (cf. Chap. 1). Until the Treaty 
of Amsterdam the policy area of employment and social affairs was the only 
part of the ‘acquis communautaire’ where the European Union had com-
petencies for promoting gender equality. Thus the responsibility and central 
function of DG Employment was not unusual per se. However, in contrast 
to previous gender equality policy programmes, DG Employment tried to 
involve all other DGs in the drafting process without having any rights or 
powers to rule over them. All DGs are formally equal and this means that 

94 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

civil servants of one DG cannot determine or control the work of their col-
leagues, even if these colleagues contribute to their document. The DG’s 
‘collaboration’ attempt was the opposite of what lead DGs usually do when 
they are responsible for a Commission proposal: they normally aim to avoid 
too much interference from other DGs (Hartlapp et al. 2013).

Furthermore, defining the Roadmap as a Commission communication 
and not a legislative act led to the application of internal Commission rules 
only. With this decision the roles of the actors were clearly divided from 
the  start.  The  Commission,  i.e.  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG 
Employment, was the only institution responsible for coordinating, draft-
ing and adopting the Roadmap. Thereby the other EU institutions and 
non-governmental actors were automatically excluded from drafting the 
Roadmap.  Instead  they  were  limited  to  their  role  as  commentators  or 
lobby groups following the adoption by the Commission.

Inside the Commission the crucial formal procedure was the interser-
vice consultation and its respective rules. Passing all stages of this proce-
dure is a prerequisite for adoption. However, the policy process prior to 
the formal interservice consultation is not formalised in the same way in 
terms of who must be involved and how. The Commission rules of proce-
dure can be seen as formalised guidelines that structure the drafting of 
Commission  communications  (or  any  other  Commission  document). 
Regarding timing and cooperation the rules of procedure25 prescribe that 
‘from an early stage in the policy-making process interservice cooperation is 
the  bedrock  of  the  Commission’s  work.  Interservice  groups  should  assist  the 
policy-making process, including all initiatives in the work programme with 
the formal stage of interservice consultation acting as a final round to involve 
all relevant services.’

Therefore,  the  internal  Commission  policy  process  that  leads  to  the 
Roadmap  serves  as  a  salient  example  for  gender  equality.  It  is  of  great 
interest that the codes of conduct and official obligations were relatively 
vague,  although  a  formalised  process  existed  and  Commission  civil  ser-
vants were aware of the routine. Apart from the fact that the guidelines are 
not binding and rather describe expectations for the working routines, the 
term ‘early stage’ is particularly vague and gives room for strategic manoeu-
vres. Not only was the time span vague, but also the guidelines concerning 
which actors have to be included in the interservice consultation and who 
has to be involved for a certain draft. Depending on how conflict-laden a 
draft is, lead DGs often only involve other DGs immediately before the 

2.2  RULES, ROUTINES AND ACTOR CONSTELLATIONS OVER TIME 

  95

formal interservice consultation in order to strengthen their political posi-
tion and avoid further discussions (Hartlapp et al. 2013).

Surprisingly,  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG  Employment  took  a 
different route and applied the Commission’s rules of procedure when 
coordinating and drafting the Roadmap. Instead of selecting some DGs 
from the whole portfolio, all DGs were invited to the initial meeting. 
Furthermore, it is important to note that the Gender Equality Unit of 
DG Employment followed the rules, although in a different way than 
the usual procedure in the Commission. At the same time the Gender 
Equality  Unit  followed  the  informal  rules  of  the  implementation  of 
 gender mainstreaming by aiming to involve all DGs. Why the Gender 
Equality Unit strategically chose to involve all DGs and which problems 
persisted will be discussed in detail in consecutive chapters.

While DG Employment actively contacted the other DGs and interin-
stitutional  groups  to  collect  input  for  the  Roadmap  draft,  most  of  the 
other external actors had to contact DG Employment to become involved 
and to exert pressure at an early stage. Regardless of whether an NGO, the 
European Parliament or Social Partners were involved in the process, they 
all had to develop their own ways of influencing the Commission. There 
was  no  attempt  to  influence  the  drafting  of  the  Roadmap  via  channels 
other than DG Employment, for instance by shaping the policy content 
via the responsibility of other DGs. We can assume that policy improve-
ments could have been achieved by influencing other DGs and/or involv-
ing  other  actors  in  the  policy  process.  Such  an  argument  was  also  put 
forward  by  the  civil  servants  of  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  in  DG 
Employment  who  stated  that  they  would  have  lacked  the  expertise  to 
define and formulate gender equality policy goals in other policy areas, 
such as research, external relations or transport.

The European Parliament’s strategy was first, to exert pressure on the 
Commissioners’ level and second, to wait until they had received the final 
communication  after  the  Commission’s  adoption.  Commission  officials 
emphasised that they were aware of the expectations of the FEMM com-
mittee members as expressed in the top level meeting: to have a smooth 
transition to a policy programme comparable to the previous one in terms 
of framework strategy and its action programme. Interestingly, no inter-
viewees from the European Parliament mentioned that the Roadmap was 
announced in the social agenda—an information gap which is discussed in 
consecutive chapters. On the other hand, the Commission representatives 
were aware of the obligation as described in the social agenda. Here we 

96 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

already can see the different narratives and different information in rela-
tion to the same process. It was the MEPs who pushed the Commission to 
develop and publish a new policy programme. As we will see in the next 
section  this  conviction  is  not  only  held  by  the  MEPs,  but  also  by  the 
European Women’s Lobby, the Social Partners and the interinstitutional 
groups  who  are  all  convinced  that  they  contributed  to  the  Roadmap’s 
existence.

2.2.2 

  Actors over the Course of Time

Figure 2.1 clearly shows that the overall composition of actors in the pol-
icy process did not fundamentally change, although the balance between 
actors who were formally and informally involved in drafting and adopting 
the Roadmap changed considerably over the course of time. The actors 
who  dominated  the  policy  process  changed  with  the  adoption  of  the 
Roadmap  by  the  Commissioners’  College.  Prior  to  that  time  the 
Commission had held the most powerful position, controlling the whole 
drafting process and deciding who else could participate, to which extent 
and at which point in time.

At the beginning a large number of Commission actors—various DGs 
and their subgroups—participated and drafted the body of the text. The 
Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment played the major part in coor-
dinating and organising the whole process. Commission services, such as 
the  Legal  Service  (SJ)  or  units  responsible  for  impact  assessments26  or 
evaluation,27  were  only  involved  in  technical  areas,  like  checking  the 
Roadmap  communication’s  consistency  with  the  treaties  or  transferring 
the activities in the Roadmap into an activity-based management. In this 
sense the Legal Service and the evaluation and impact assessment units 
were non-participating actors. They fulfilled a central role in the adoption 
process,  despite  not  actively  participating  in  the  formulation  of  gender 
equality policy.

Subsequently, the Commission (represented by the Gender Equality 
Unit of DG Employment) participated in the procedures of the other 
EU institutions and had to follow the rules of these actors, such as the 
EP or the Council, including the way in which they scheduled Roadmap-
related events. With the Commission’s adoption of the Roadmap the 
emphasis of actors who were coordinating and controlling the processes 
shifted from the Commission to a shared responsibility of the former 
external actors. The parliamentary FEMM committee and the European 

2.2  RULES, ROUTINES AND ACTOR CONSTELLATIONS OVER TIME 

  97

Policy Process external to
European Commission

Policy Process internal to the
European Commission

Interinstitutional
Policy Process

Commission reply to EP
resolution, June 1, 2007

Adoption EP
resolution on the
roadmap in plenary,
March 13, 2007

Opinion of
the Committee of
the Regions,
December 6, 2006

Adoption EP
resolution on the
roadmap in FEMM
committee,
January 24, 2007

Opinion of the
European
Economic and
Social Committee,
September 13, 2006

Roadmap presen-
tation to Council.
March 10, 2006

FEMM committee
exchange of views
with VIPs, March 8,
2006

Conference “Gender Equality:
a step ahead” Map 4-5, 2006

Adoption Gender Equality
Pact, March 10, 2006

Publication Roadmap for Equality between Men and Woman 2006-2010

Commissioner Spidla
contacts single MEP from
FEMM committee

Commissioners College adopts
Roadmap, March 1, 2006

EWL presents “Shadow
Roadmap” at Gender Lunch

Advisory Committee
publishes opinion on the
forthcoming Roadmap

EWL publishes Gender Equality
Road Map for the European
community 2006-2010
(Shadow Roadmap)

G
D
 
s
e

t
i
v
n

i
 

e
e

t
t
i

’

m
m
o
C
 
s
n
a
m
o
W
C
U
T
E

 

e
v
i
t

a

t

n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r
 
t

n
e
m
y
o
p
m
E

l

i

e
c
v
r
e
s
r
e

t

n

I
 
s
g
n

i
t

 

e
e
m
d
r
a
d
n
a
S

t

DG EMPL checks documents from
NGOs, Social Partners, EP, CoR, EESC
and the evaluation of framework

i

g
n
m
a
e
r
t
s
n
a
M

i

 
r
e
d
n
e
G
n
o

 

 

p
u
o
r
G

RELEX and RTD subgroups
meetings

Social Partners adopt “Framework of
Actions on Gender Equality”, March 1.
2005

Informal meeting FEMM Committee
MEPs and Group of Commissioners on
Fundamental Rights,
Non-Discrimination and Equal
Opportunities

DG EMPL consults High
Level Group on Gender
Mainstreaming

High Level meeting
Inter-Service Group
on Gender  Equality

DG EMPL consults
Advisory Committee

Adoption Social Agenda, February 9, 2005

Fig. 2.1  Roadmap policy process timeline.  
Compilation by author

 

7
0
0
2
H
C
R
A
M

 

6
0
0
2
H
C
R
A
M

 

5
0
0
2
R
E
B
M
E
V
O
N

 

5
0
0
2
R
E
M
M
U
S

 

5
0
0
2
H
C
R
A
M

 
98 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

Women’s  Lobby  then  dominated  this  process.  Nonetheless,  DG 
Employment always functioned as a hinge in drafting and distributing 
the  communication,  regardless  of  time  and  space.  Within  the 
Commission the Gender Equality Unit coordinated the various DGs, as 
well as the external attempts to influence the drafting, e.g. the Social 
Partners or women’s organisations. The changing balance of actors over 
the course of time is explained by the rules and routines, as described 
above.

The working routine inside the Commission involved all participating 
DGs in a communication in the process of drafting, whereby one lead DG 
finalised the document before entering the final stage of the interservice 
consultation.  In  terms  of  the  Roadmap  and  gender  equality  policy  one 
occasion differed from every other communication. As the official political 
EU strategy in gender equality policy, gender mainstreaming required the 
involvement of every single DG and consequently all thematic DGs28 of 
the Commission. From the description of the policy process we can see 
that the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment, as well as some other 
Commission civil servants officially responsible for gender equality, took 
the treaty obligation seriously and wanted to involve literally all DGs when 
drafting the Roadmap:

Because the decision we took with the Roadmap was to cover all the areas where 
the  Commission  works,  because  we  have  the  treaty  that  says  we  have  to  have 
gender equality in all our policies, so it was decided that we should cover all of 
them. (Commission official 6:16)

Obviously not all DGs participated, at least not to the same extent:

Q:  You  said  more  than  twenty  DGs,  does  that  mean  literally  all  DGs  are 
included in the Roadmap?
A: Nearly all, some less, … nearly all the policy DGs were involved in the imple-
mentation of the Roadmap.
Q: But on different levels or on the same level?
A: No, of course it was on different levels, some are more central for the deliv-
ery  of  output  of  the  Roadmap,  like,  OK  …  DG  Employment  is  the  most 
involved but you have also DG Education and Culture, you have DG RTD for 
research, you have also some DG like Justice… OK, there are some with more 
weight in the implementation of the actions than others. (Commission official 
33:17–20)

2.2  RULES, ROUTINES AND ACTOR CONSTELLATIONS OVER TIME 

  99

The  documents  connected  to  the  Roadmap  revealed  that  content 
related  contributions  to  the  Roadmap  varied  in  terms  of  the  degree  of 
involvement from single DGs. They did not deviate from what Hafner- 
Burton and Pollack (2009: 115) found: ‘(…) rather than the consistent 
spread  of  a  gender  perspective  to  all  issue-areas  and  all  DGs  we  find  a 
highly variable and voluntary adoption of gender-sensitive policy-making, 
with intense focus on gender in some areas and little or no apparent activ-
ity in others.’

In  total  around  one  third  of  DGs  covered  almost  all  of  the  priority 
areas, while one third were responsible for smaller aspects and the remain-
ing third did not actively participate. The way in which DGs approached 
their way of contributing varied in particular policy areas and can be clus-
tered in three groups:

 1.  DGs  organising  a  sub-working  group  that  covered  connected  policy 
areas;  e.g.  Employment  collaborated  with  Structural  Policies  and 
External Relations worked together with Enlargement. The sub- working 
groups  organised  the  contribution  of  their  respective  policy  areas 
differently (see below), although sub-working groups often covered 
one complete priority area of action or even a complete chapter29 of 
the Roadmap. The sub-working groups also drafted their part of the 
Roadmap.

 2.  DGs contributing to smaller content-related aspects and actions of the 
Roadmap without connecting with other DGs and with a contribution 
to  one  small  point.  The  contribution  was  subsequently  sent  to  the 
Gender Equality Unit in DG Employment without further editing or 
influencing the position in the final text.

 3.  DGs  without  any  content-related  contribution  and  only  involved  in 
human resource management related to gender equality coordinated 
by DG Administration.30 Goals within this area were presented in the 
Roadmap as annex III ‘Equal Opportunities policy between men and 
women at the European Commission’; a Roadmap part that covers all 
Commission DGs per definition. Commission officials of DGs belong-
ing to this group were often unaware that the Roadmap even existed 
and therefore probably rarely or never participated in the meetings of 
the interservice group on gender equality. Also, the group covers some 
of the most powerful and male-dominated DGs such as DG Trade and 
DG Enterprise & Industry without any commitment to gender equal-
ity in their policies.

100 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

In the first group we find the four policy areas of employment, regional 
policy, research and external relations. Within these policy areas DGs were 
located that took a basic premise of gender mainstreaming seriously, with 
each actor being responsible for promoting gender equality in his or her 
policy area.31 The four policy areas had similarities and differences in the 
way in which they organised their contribution.

DG Employment had set up its own internal working group on gender 
mainstreaming, by which time each unit delegated one responsible person 
in their specific area of employment and social affairs policies. The Gender 
Equality Unit of DG Employment explained this decision with reference 
to assuring ownership of the Roadmap:

Within the DG Employment we also had an internal working group; which 
means that we had meetings with the colleagues in charge of the evaluation, of 
employment policies, social inclusion, and so on and so forth. So we really had…
Q: …an internal process.
A: Yes. Specific of DG Employment. Because parts of the things that we have are 
not really in the hands of our unit, that is the unit for gender equality, but in 
the hands of other units. So it was really a lot of work and there was a lot of 
information going on. But I think it was very interesting. And what we wanted 
to achieve with this was that each of the units here in the DG Employment, but 
also each of the DGs would feel responsible and would feel that they were the 
masters of parts of the Roadmap. (Commission official 6:24–26)

DG Research and Innovation replicated the working group approach of 
DG  Employment  with  an  internal  working  group  on  gender  aspects, 
although the Commission official was unsure how the group participated 
in developing the Roadmap because s/he was working on a different sub-
ject at that time:

We manage the gender watch system, which is another interservice group, but 
internal to DG Research only. And we try to monitor gender related issues in 
other DGs in research of course, and not other staff management. (…) we try 
to monitor the presence of gender issues in research fields: in nanotech, in  biotech, 
etc. (Commission official 17:12)

According to another Commission official DG Research also consulted 
experts  from  the  ‘Helsinki  Group  on  Women  and  Science32’  to  discuss 
possible  contributions  to  the  Roadmap  before  sending  drafts  to  DG 
Employment (Interview 12).

2.2  RULES, ROUTINES AND ACTOR CONSTELLATIONS OVER TIME 

  101

For the structural funds33 the DGs concerned (DG Employment, DG 
Regional Policy, DG Fisheries, and DG Agriculture) had a group for the 
part of the Roadmap that was related to the funds.34 This group discussed 
the contribution and content in relation to structural funds:

Those dealing with the funds sort of formed a group and tried to make common 
proposals. (Commission official 11:116)

When investigating the DGs responsible for the different external rela-
tions we can see a similar approach to the structural funds. The so-called 
RELEX family35 which consisted of DG Development, DG Enlargement, 
DG External Relations, DG Trade, EuropAid36 and ECHO37 set up a work-
ing group in order to agree upon a common approach and contribution:

For instance, for all the sections of external relations, right, there is now a sort 
of interservice … all the different sorts of DGs, AIDCO, the one dealing with 
aid, the one dealing with development and cooperation, the one dealing with 
enlargement, the one dealing with external relations and the one dealing with 
trade, yeah, these DGs and the officers in charge of gender equality got together 
and formed a group. (Commission official 11:116)

However, the sub-working group of the RELEX family faced a similar 
pattern  as  the  Commission  interservice  group  on  gender  equality. 
According to one Commission official the activities were unevenly distrib-
uted with at least one DG abstaining from the working process.

Trade is a tricky issue. Because they should be involved, but for them gender is 
not really a priority. Imagine that we have this gender subgroup of the DG 
Employment’s big gender group, I mean this RELEX, and it was the first meet-
ing when Trade appeared, it was only last week, although this year we’ve already 
had  three  meetings.  (…)  It’s  basically  the  leaders  who  do  not  want  to  send 
someone, because they say it’s not important. (Commission official 1:69)

The second group of DGs comprises those who contributed to smaller 
content related aspects of the Roadmap and exchanged their contributions 
with DG Employment via email or personally. They did not have any par-
ticular institutional unit or group for gender equality within their Directorate 
General.  The  smaller  content  related  contributions  of  the  DGs  were  all 
verified  by  documentary  research  and  confirmed  that  keywords  such  as 
‘gender’  and/or  ‘equal’  were  mentioned  in  the  legislative  documents 

102 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

 connected to the prospective activities. The DGs include, for example, DG 
Education  and  Culture,  DG  Health  and  Consumer  Protection,  DG 
Information Society and Media, DG Enterprise and DG Communication. 
The person who participated in drafting the Roadmap was often the only 
one responsible for gender equality in their home Directorate General.

DGs who belong to the third group shared three (sometimes overlap-
ping) aspects: (1) The DG did not appear in the Roadmap with any activ-
ity, nor their legislative documents contained keywords such as ‘gender” 
and/or “equal’; (2) Civil servants of the DG were never mentioned by any 
other interviewee; or (3) The Commission official evidently did not know 
that the Roadmap existed. The following DGs belong to this group: DG 
Internal  Market,  DG  Competition,  DG  Taxation  and  Customs  Union, 
DG Trade, DG Environment, DG Energy and Transport, DG Budget and 
DG Economic and Financial Affairs.

Some of the differences in the degree to which actors participated in 
the Roadmap can be explained by the split of competencies between the 
supranational and national level, as defined in the EU treaties. For exam-
ple, education and culture or public health are predominantly a member 
state competency, whereas EU competencies are very limited.

After the main activities within the Commission, the Gender Equality 
Unit from DG Employment involved external actors on an informal level. 
While  negotiating  inside  the  Commission  external  contacts  were  previ-
ously  limited  to  exchanges  with  interinstitutional  groups,  such  as  the 
Advisory Committee and the High Level Group on gender mainstream-
ing.  The  contacts  with  these  two  groups  were  more  of  an  informative 
nature and secured the plans of DG Employment, rather than collecting 
input  to  the  Roadmap  communication.  The  Commission  made  a  clear 
division between their formal obligations and informal necessities in the 
way they approached the different actors. For instance, the Commission 
spoke about the Advisory Committee and the High Level Group as mem-
ber states’ representatives, almost ignoring that the Social Partners and the 
EWL also participated, at least in the Advisory Committee.

In  conclusion,  we  can  see  that  the  whole  internal  Commission  pro-
cesses worked smoothly according to the Commission actors, in particular 
regarding the discussions among DGs about the content. Furthermore, 
the policy process was effective in producing the Roadmap in a short time. 
However, this smooth internal process went against the explicit aims of 
Commissioner  Margot  Wallström  who  sought  to  actively  involve  stake-
holders. Quite the contrary took place in gender equality policy processes: 

2.2  RULES, ROUTINES AND ACTOR CONSTELLATIONS OVER TIME 

  103

the  external  policy-making  processes  required  ongoing  activity  by  non- 
Commission actors to deliver their interests, even though they were not 
included in the agenda-setting process. Nonetheless, they were involved 
through publishing their own documents, which were subsequently taken 
into account as background information by DG Employment. Whereas 
the way in which the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment handled 
outside actors might be usual, the codes of conduct38 of the Commission 
in terms of consulting stakeholders and civil society participation would 
have suggested approaching external actors differently by, for instance, an 
internet-based consultation process.39 However, in the impact assessment 
the Commission claimed that they included relevant stakeholders and that 
‘[t]hus the Commission has complied with the minimum standards for the 
consultation of interested parties40’. Referring to the minimum standards is 
indeed  the  best  description  in  this  regard  because  Commission  actors 
obviously  did  just  what  was  absolutely  necessary  while  preferring  their 
own smooth, undisturbed process.

2.2.3 

  FEMM—Taking over from the European Commission

Surprisingly, the process inside the European Parliament featured a similar 
pattern as the one in the Commission. Committees are usually not eager 
to involve other committees in giving an opinion and providing amend-
ments. As one FEMM member noted in respect to gendered power rela-
tions, amendments from the FEMM committee are often not integrated 
into the opinions of other committees and are rarely accepted by the lead 
committee (Interview 2). Asking a high number of other committees for 
an opinion is as unusual as inviting all DGs to participate in drafting. With 
this in mind it is interesting that a similar pattern occurred when two com-
mittees,  Foreign  Affairs  (AFET)  and  Environment  and  Public  Health 
(ENVI), decided not to give an opinion at all. The two committees can be 
classified as non-participating actors, given that they did not participate in 
drafting, despite being part of the formal process. The four other commit-
tees provided an opinion, albeit a rather short one, with the exception of 
the Employment Committee (EMPL). It must be noted that those respon-
sible in Parliament and the Council did not try to lobby the Commission; 
they simply waited for the Roadmap to arrive.

The European Women’s Lobby activated their network via the Gender 
Lunches  in  order  to  mobilise  civil  society  for  future  discussions  of  the 
Roadmap. It is pivotal to note that the EWL has a very good network and 

104 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

actively sought to involve as many actors as possible from outside to lobby 
the Commission. They got in touch with many NGOs, different MEPs 
and  Social  Partners  in  specific  policy  areas.  NGOs  and  especially  the 
European Women’s Lobby published policy papers and suggested that the 
Commission  should  involve  them  in  the  internal  Commission  drafting 
process.

The  European  Trade  Union  Confederation  (ETUC) 

invited 
Commission representatives and participated in the Advisory Committee. 
Notably, the trade union official made a reference to a formal consultation 
process, even though Commission officials stated that there was no formal 
consultation process with external actors. The different interpretations as 
formal or informal might be explained by the participation of the trade 
union in the Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and 
Men, as well as the way in which the committee was once constituted in 
the policy process. The members are formally invited by DG Employment. 
Therefore, the committee constitutes a formal status for their policy-mak-
ing  from  the  members’  perspective.  At  the  same  time  the  Advisory 
Committee is informal from the perspective of the Roadmap policy-mak-
ing process internal to the Commission. Despite being a member of the 
Advisory committee, the employers’ organisations were completely inac-
tive, with the exception of the European Centre of Enterprises with Public 
Participation  and  of  Enterprises  of  General  Economic  Interest  (CEEP) 
who published an opinion41 on the Roadmap after its publication.

As the lead Directorate General DG Employment distinguished between 
internal and external inputs, where the former consisted of the Commission 
interservice  group  on  gender  equality,  while  the  latter  comprised  the 
Advisory Committee, the High Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming, 
the  European  Women’s  Lobby,  the  parliamentary  Women’s  Rights  and 
Gender Equality Committee and Social Partners, all of whom were involved 
via different channels. For instance, the Advisory Committee and High 
Level Group were directly involved in meetings, whereas the others were 
indirectly involved by explicitly checking documents. For the external pro-
cess  it  is  essential  to  bear  in  mind  the  specific  role  of  the  Advisory 
Committee as an interinstitutional group because the committee member-
ship functioned as a catalyst for activities of the European Trade Union, 
the European Women’s Lobby and for member states.42

Even though the Social Partners and the EWL attended the Advisory 
Committee, they were not acknowledged by either DG Employment or 
the member state representatives as active and relevant contributors to this 

2.3  CONCLUSION 

  105

group.  The  Commission  officials  even  spoke  about  the  Advisory 
Committee as a body representing the member states, whereas the EWL 
and the Social Partners were not recognised as part of that group in the 
same way. Instead, topics covered by the EWL and Social Partners were 
predominantly derived from documents of the two: the ‘Gender Equality 
Road Map for the European Community 2006–2010’, published by the 
EWL, and the ‘Framework of Actions on Gender Equality’, signed by the 
Social  Partners.43  The  same  applied  to  the  European  Parliament:  docu-
ments  of  the  parliamentary  Women’s  Rights  and  Gender  Equality 
Committee  were  taken  into  account,  although  no  personal  or  informal 
meetings on the working level were convened. The Commission used dif-
ferent ways of involvement of different actors in the preparation process.

2.3 

  conclusion

Analysing the policy process over time highlights how the actors involved 
in EU gender equality policy each followed their specific institutional rules 
and  routines  while  lacking  knowledge  about  each  other’s  routines.  By 
shedding light on the different steps of the policy process, this chapter 
illuminated which actors contested gender equality policy at what stage of 
the process and how actors in charge of the policy area (re)acted strategi-
cally to the anticipated formal and informal elements of the policy process. 
Thus, the adoption process must be understood within the context of time 
and space in relation to rules and resources. This means that the policy 
process followed a specific kind of timeline, depending on rules and rou-
tines that shaped different points in time. Rules and (inter)action, how-
ever, do not exist independently of the actors; quite the opposite, ‘(…) 
people follow rules patterned in social structure; collective knowledge of social 
rules is the condition of social interaction’ (Tucker 1998: 81). Despite their 
collaboration these actors’ bureaucratic processes were not aligned.

This  chapter  also  introduced  the  EU  instrument  of  soft  law  by 
Commission communications, one of which is the ‘Roadmap for equality 
between  women  and  men  2006–2010’.  The  adoption  process  of  the 
Roadmap was explored over the course of time, answering the question 
of  who  participated  when  and  how  in  the  Roadmap  policy  process, 
thereby shedding light on the ‘official narrative’, as well as three distinct, 
yet overlapping processes: the internal Commission process, the process 
between the internal and external actors and the process external to the 
Commission.

106 
 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

The differentiation was not merely functional; rather, it originated from 
the  narratives  of  interviewees,  thereby  showing  why  the  process  was 
unusual for setting up Commission communications and also unusual for 
setting up gender equality programmes. Additional actors, such as NGOs 
and interest groups that tried to participate in the policy process and aimed 
to make their voices heard, received special attention.

Institutional rules are connected in the policy process by certain mile-
stones, such as the publication of the Roadmap on 8th March 2006. Still, 
the actors practised ‘silo politics’ with each other, only grasping a certain 
scope  of  the  whole  policy  process,  defined  by  the  formal  and  informal 
procedures in which the actors were involved. The FEMM committee, the 
EWL,  the  trade  union  and  member  state  representatives  knew  that  the 
Commission would adopt the Roadmap communication at some point in 
time and that the responsibility would subsequently shift to the EP, the 
Council, the Committee of the Regions and the EESC. The exact date, 
however, was not known in advance. Moreover, actors from one institu-
tion (e.g. the FEMM committee) were unaware of when and how other 
actors (e.g. the EWL) were involved in the drafting process of a third actor 
(e.g. the Commission). This limited information applied to all actors and 
provides evidence that actors were only aware of their own direct environ-
ment. It showed the importance of an understanding of the spatial breath 
of knowledge and how actors are restricted within their structure.

We learned how civil servants from the Gender Equality Unit in DG 
Employment  transformed  the  standard  Commission  rules  by  extending 
them with gender mainstreaming. However, by sticking to the standard 
rules as a dominant form of interaction the Gender Equality Unit simulta-
neously  (re)produced  the  Commission’s  policy-making  procedures.  In 
effect they added the ‘factivity’ of the institutional order in day-to-day life 
by resorting to their practical consciousness (Giddens 1984: 331).

Furthermore, the interaction that took place must also be understood 
as an expression of the power of the Gender Equality Unit, because they 
had ‘the capability to secure outcomes where the realisation of these outcomes 
depends upon the agency of others’ (Giddens 1976: 111, emphasis in the 
original).  The  whole  internal  process  of  involving  other  DGs  illustrates 
this specific capability. By shifting the drafting to the interservice group on 
gender equality conflicts were avoided; a tactic often used in the making 
of hard law as well (Hartlapp et al. 2014). Likewise, avoiding conflicts (as 
a form of compromise) with external actors was assured by keeping exter-
nal actors away from internal discussions. They were only given the floor 

  NOTES 

  107

after the adoption or in top-level meetings; their main documents were 
referenced  only  in  the  impact  assessment.  In  fact,  the  Gender  Equality 
Unit circumvented resistance from other DGs or top-level management 
by the very process that assured compromise and acceptance at the cost of 
lowering the policy implications.

With regard to the external process the Gender Equality Unit limited 
the involvement of NGOs, for instance, by claiming to apply Commission 
rules.  Compared  to  drafting  previous  policy  programmes  the  Gender 
Equality Unit transformed the rules that guided the previous institution- 
transcending network, coined as the ‘velvet triangle’ (Woodward 2004) 
into the primacy of the rules of their institution. Through this shift in col-
laboration routines no institution transcending policy network existed for 
drafting the Roadmap.

Choosing to publish the Roadmap as a Commission communication 
consequently limited the number of institutional actors involved in nego-
tiating supranational EU gender equality policy programmes. Furthermore, 
by  closely  investigating  the  rules  and  routines  that  played  a  role  in  the 
adoption  process  gender  equality  actors  strictly  followed  standard  EU 
policy-making rules, combining them with rules derived from the gender 
mainstreaming strategy. In effect, the number of actors relevant to draft-
ing the Roadmap was smaller than expected. In light of the implementa-
tion  of  gender  mainstreaming  and  all  the  policy  topics  listed  in  the 
‘Roadmap’, a higher number of actors involved was anticipated including 
actors,  such  as  those  mentioned  in  Annex  II  on  a  specific  institutional 
structure  for  gender  equality  policies  at  EU  level  (Communication 
COM(2006)  92  final).  In  summary,  there  were  literally  no  contacts 
between  the  internal  and  the  external  processes  of  policy  formulation, 
even though external actors maintained contact with each other to some 
extent over the course of time.

The unintended consequences of the choices made by actors resulted in 
silencing  potential  conflicts  between  internal  and  external  actors.  The 
result,  as  we  will  see  in  the  following  chapter,  was  advancing  content, 
based on a strategy of the ‘smallest common denominator’.

 
  1.  Feminist institutionalism with its focus on how institutions are gendered 
and which role power relations play follow a comparable idea of analysing 
throughput legitimacy and its ‘rules of the game’ that constrain and enable 

notes

 
108 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

political actors (Chappell 2006; Chappell and Waylen 2013; Kenny 2007; 
MacKay et al. 2010).

  2.  Hard law comprises directives, regulations and decisions, for instance.
  3.  All EU Commissioners together with the Commission President are called 
the ‘Commissioners’ College’. The group holds weekly confidential, not 
public  meetings  and,  if  necessary,  additional  ones  on  urgent  matters  or 
before important Council meetings. For further details, please refer to the 
Commission rules of procedure, as described in the Commission decision 
C(2000) 3614.

  4.  For technical, administrative and managerial tasks, additional decision pro-
cedures exist: the empowerment and the delegation procedure, although 
both  are  unimportant  for  political  proposals.  For  further  details,  please 
refer to the Commission rules of procedure as described in the Commission 
decision C(2000) 3614.

  5.  Depending on the institution, the response to the Commission communi-

cation is either called an opinion or resolution.

  6.  The Council agenda is divided into so-called A and B items. A items can be 
approved without further discussion, because the Coreper already agreed 
upon  the  item,  whereas  B  items  are  scheduled  for  debate.  For  further 
details,  please  consult  http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/institu-
tional_affairs/institutions_bodies_and_agencies/l14576_en.htm 
(accessed 4th August 2013).

  7.  European Commission, 2005, Communication from the Commission on 
the  Social  Agenda,  Brussels,  9th  February  2005,  COM(2005)  33  final, 
p. 10.

  8.  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European 
Parliament,  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the 
Committee of the Regions: A Roadmap for equality between women and 
men 2006–2010. COM(2006) 92 final.

  9.  Commission  staff  working  document—Annex  to  the  Communication 
from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
European  Economic  and  Social  committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions—A Roadmap for equality between women and men 2006–2010—
Impact assessment {COM(2006) 92 final} /SEC/2006/0275/.

 10.  Cf. Commission response to text adopted in plenary, SP(2007)2139/3, 

1st June 2007.

 11.  Cf. European Commission, Gender Equality: a step ahead. A Roadmap for 
the future. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European 
Communities, 2007.

 12.  The distinction between formal and informal is rather fluid. The term ‘for-
mal’ applies to obligatory, institutionalised procedures that are conditional 
for adopting a communication for instance, The term ‘informal’ applies to 

  NOTES 

  109

procedures  that  accompany  such  a  formal  process  and  are  often  equally 
institutionalised although not formal. Some processes and procedures are 
in between formal and informal and are thus quasi-formal or semi-formal.
 13.  Helfferich and Kolb (2001) provided a detailed description of the transna-

tional interest formation inside the European Women’s Lobby.

 14.  Cf. Gender Equality Road Map for the European Community 2006–2010. 

Presented by the European Women’s Lobby, November 2005.

 15.  Advisory  Committee  on  Equal  Opportunities  for  Women  and  Men, 
“Opinion  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  the  forthcoming  Commission 
Communication on future developments for equality between women and 
men (Roadmap)”, November 2005.

 16.  Cf.  Annex  II,  Brussels  European  Council  23rd/24th  March  2006—

Presidency Conclusions. Published May 5, 2006, 7775/1/06 REV1.

 17.  Cf.  Opinion  of  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  on  the 
Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European 
Parliament,  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the 
Committee of the Regions A Roadmap for equality between women and 
men 2006–2010 COM(2006) 92 final OJ C 318, 23rd December 2006, 
p. 173–179.

 18.  Cf. Opinion of the Committee of the Regions of 6 December 2006 on the 
Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  The  European 
Parliament,  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the 
Committee of the Regions: A Roadmap for equality between women and 
men  2006–2010,  COM(2006)  92  final.  Official  Journal  C  057,  10th 
March 2007, p. 0029–0033.

 19.  Cf.  Annex  II,  Brussels  European  Council  23rd/24th  March  2006—

Presidency Conclusions. Published May 5, 2006, 7775/1/06 REV1.

 20.  Cf.  Committee  on  Women’s  Rights  and  Gender  Equality.  Statistics  on 
main  activities  during  the  sixth  legislative  period  (2004–2009),  version 
17th October 2007.

 21.  The  author  is  indebted  to  Sabine  Lang  for  reminding  me  of  the  de- 

politicising effect.

 22.  Foreign Affairs (AFET), Development (DEVE), Employment and Social 
Affairs  (EMPL),  Environment,  Public  Health  and  Food  Safety  (ENVI), 
Industry, Research and Energy (ITRE), Civil Liberties, Justice and Home 
Affairs (LIBE).

 23.  Cf. European Parliament resolution of 13th March 2007 on a Roadmap 
for equality between women and men (2006–2010) (2006/2132(INI)), 
OJ C 301E, 13th December 2007, p. 56–63.

 24.  The 74 amendments are divided as follows: 24 from the Committee on 
Development  (DEVE),  28  from  the  Committee  on  Employment  and 
Social  Affairs  (EMPL),  and  11  each  from  The  Committee  on  Industry, 

 
110 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

Research and Energy (ITRE) and the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice 
and Home Affairs.

 25.  Cf.  Rules  of  Procedure  of  the  Commission  (C(2000)  3614).  Official 

Journal L 308, 8th December 2000, p. 26–34.

 26.  For  details  on  the  impact  assessment  obligations,  please  refer  to 
impact  assessment, 

the  Commission  on 

Communication 
COM/2002/0276 final, 6th June 2002.

from 

 27.  For  details  on  the  evaluation  guidelines,  please  refer  to  European 
Commission,  Evaluating  EU  Activities.  A  Practical  Guide  for  the 
Commission Services. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the 
European Communities, 2004.

 28.  The Commission is divided into departments (DGs) and services dealing 

with more general administrative issues or a specific mandate.

 29.  Admittedly,  DG  Administration  would  also  count  among  this  group, 
because they discussed the annual gender equality plans regarding human 
resources  management  with  every  DG  (Interview  13).  However,  as 
explained  in  the  methods  section  (cf.  annex),  DG  Administration  was 
excluded from the final analysis.

 30.  DG Administration is in charge of monitoring and negotiating the human 

resources development of all DGs.

 31.  Cf. Council of Europe/Group of Specialists on Mainstreaming (1999), 
Gender  Mainstreaming.  Conceptual  framework,  methodology  and  pre-
sentation  of  good  practice.  Final  report  of  Activities  of  the  Group  of 
Specialists  on  Mainstreaming  (EG-S-MS).  Summary.  EC  (99)  3. 
Strasbourg.

 32.  The Helsinki Group on Women and Science was launched in 1999, con-
sisting of national civil servants of all 27 member states, as well as Iceland, 
Israel, Norway, Switzerland and Turkey. The group’s task is to promote 
participation and equal opportunities for women in science.

 33.  The EU structural funds comprise the European Social Fund (ESF), the 
European Regional and Development Fund (ERDF), and the Cohesion 
Fund.

 34.  No interviewee mentioned the High Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming 

in the Structural Funds playing a role in drafting the Roadmap.

 35.  With the Treaty of Lisbon, the composition of the RELEX family changed 

and the European External Action Service (EEAS) was created.

 36.  EuropAid is an EU agency that managed and implemented most of the 

budget for the official development assistance of the EU.

 37.  ECHO is the abbreviation for European Commission Humanitarian Aid.
 38.  Cf. “Towards a reinforced culture of consultation and dialogue—general 
principles and minimum standards for consultation of interested parties by 
the Commission”, COM(2002) 704.

  REFERENCES 

  111

 39.  Back then, internet-based consultations were already usual. Klein (2006) 
illustrated how and with what result DG Employment launched an open 
consultation addressed to member states, stakeholders, NGOs and indi-
vidual citizens on the so-called “recast-Directive”.

 40.  Commission  staff  working  document—Annex  to  the  Communication 
from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
European  Economic  and  Social  committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions—A Roadmap for equality between women and men 2006–2010—
Impact assessment {COM(2006) 92 final} /SEC/2006/0275/, page 4.

 41.  CEEP  Opinion  on  Roadmap  for  Equality  between  Men  and  Women. 

CEEP.2006/Avis.24, September 2006.

 42.  Without  claiming  causality,  the  “European  Pact  for  Gender  Equality” 
(adopted 23rd/24th March 2006 at the Spring Council) was one of the 
results of the member state activities.

 43.  Cf. ETUC, UNICE/UEAPME, CEEP, Framework of Actions on Gender 

Equality, Brussels, 1st March 2005.

references

Abels, Gabriele. 2016. Multi-Level Governance: Tailoring a ‘Favourite Coat’ to 
the  Needs  of  ‘Gender  Fashion’.  In  Gendering  European  Integration  Theory. 
Engaging New Dialogues, ed. Gabriele Abels and Heather MacRae, 99–121. 
Opladen, Berlin & Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.

Ahrens, Petra. 2007. Gleichstellungspolitik in der Europäischen Union. Expertise 

im Auftrag der Bundestagsfraktion DIE LINKE, ed. Berlin.

Chappell, Louise. 2006. Comparing Political Institutions: Revealing the Gendered 

“Logic of Appropriateness”. Politics & Gender 2 (2): 223–235.

Chappell, Louise, and Georgina Waylen. 2013. Gender and the Hidden Life of 

Institutions. Public Administration 91 (3): 599–615.

Civil Society Contact Group. 2006. Making Your Voice Heard in the EU: A Guide 

for NGOs. Brussels: CSCG.

Coen, David, and Jeremy J. Richardson. 2009. Lobbying the European Union insti-

tutions, Actors, and Issues. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Council  of  Europe/Group  of  Specialists  on  Mainstreaming.  1999.  Gender 
Mainstreaming. Conceptual Framework, Methodology and Presentation of Good 
Practice. Final report of Activities of the Group of Specialists on Mainstreaming 
(EG-S-MS). Summary. EC (99) 3. Strasbourg.

Ellinas,  Antonis  A.,  and  Ezra  Suleiman.  2012.  The  European  Commission  and 
Bureaucratic  Autonomy.  Europe’s  Custodians.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

Giddens, Anthony. 1976. New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of 

Interpretative Sociologies. London: Hutchinson.

 
112 

2  OPENING THE BLACK BOX: THE ADOPTION OF THE ROADMAP OVER TIME

———. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. 

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Hafner-Burton, Emilie, and Mark Pollack. 2009. Mainstreaming Gender in the 
European Union. Getting the Incentives Right. Comparative European Politics 
7 (1): 114–138.

Hartlapp, Miriam, Julia Metz, and Christian Rauh (2013). Linking Agenda Setting 
to  Coordination  Structures:  Bureaucratic  Politics  Inside  the  European 
Commission. Journal of European Integration 35 (4): 425–441.

———. 2014. Which Policy for Europe? Power and Conflict Inside the European 

Commission. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Helfferich,  Barbara,  and  Felix  Kolb.  2001.  Multilevel  Action  Coordination  in 
European Contentious Politics - the Case of the European Women’s Lobby. In 
Contentious Europeans, ed. Douglas R. Imig and Sidney G. Tarrow. Lanham: 
Rowman & Littlefield.

Jacquot, Sophie. 2015. Transformations in EU Gender Equality. From Emergence 

to Dismantling. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kenny, Meryl. 2007. Gender, Institutions and Power: A Critical Review. Politics 

27 (2): 91–100.

Klein,  Uta.  2006.  Geschlechterverhältnisse  und  Gleichstellungspolitik  in  der 
Europäischen Union. Akteure - Themen - Ergebnisse. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für 
Sozialwissenschaften.

Mackay, Fiona, Meryl Kenny, and Louise Chappell. 2010. New Institutionalism 
Through a Gender Lens: Towards a Feminist Institutionalism? International 
Political Science Review 31 (5): 573–588.

Nugent, Neill. 2000. At the Heart of the Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Richardson, Jeremy. 2005. European Union: Power and Policy-Making. New York: 

Routledge.

Sage.

Schmidt,  Vivien  A.  2013.  Democracy  and  Legitimacy  in  the  European  Union 

Revisited: Input, Output and ‘Throughput’. Political Studies 61 (1): 2–22.

Spence,  David,  and  Geoffrey  Edwards,  eds.  2006.  The  European  Commission. 

London: John Harper Publishing.

Tucker, Kenneth H. 1998. Anthony Giddens and Modern Social Theory. London: 

Woodward,  Alison  E.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  European  Policy: 

Innovation or Deception? Discussion Paper. Berlin: WZB Berlin.

———. 2004. Building Velvet Triangles: Gender and Informal Governance. In 
Informal Governance in the European Union, ed. Thomas Christiansen, 76–93. 
Cheltenham: Elgar.

  KEY DOCUMENTS DOCUMENTARY RESEARCH 

  113

Key documents documentAry reseArch

European Commission. 2006. Impact Assessment Guidelines. Brussels, SEC(2005) 

791.

European Communities. 2007. The PROGRESS programme and the European 

Social Fund 2007-2013. Luxembourg 2007.

European  Women’s  Lobby:  Gender  Equality  Road  Map  for  the  European 

Community 2006–2010. Brüssel 2005.

CHAPTER 3

(Re)constructing Policy-Making Processes: 

The Actors’ Perspective

You don’t do Europe on your own, you need alliances.

(Interview with Member State Representative)

Why do actors collaborate or compete in a policy area? What are the rea-
sons for change in the actors’ relationships? Policy processes seem to fol-
low certain formal and informal rules that result in a decision. However, 
actors do not participate on equal grounds. They access the policy process 
at different times and with diverse structural backgrounds. They are also 
equipped  with  different  powers  to  shape  processes—in  Giddens  words: 
their specific knowledgeability and boundedness.

Concepts like ‘epistemic communities’ (Haas 1992) or ‘velvet triangles’ 
(Woodward 2004) explain policy-making by knowledge-driven networks. 
The concept of epistemic communities is based on the idea that networks of 
professionals with recognised expertise and competence are connected by a 
set of shared beliefs and influence policy fields through a diffusion of knowl-
edge-based ideas on different governance levels. Epistemic communities do 
not last forever. The extent to which actors cooperate depends on continu-
ous  power  to  influence  governing  actors.  In  EU  gender  equality  policy, 
Woodward’s  (2004)  notion  of  ‘velvet  triangles’  consists  of  civil   servants, 
parliamentarians and academics who create their own rules and networks to 
advance  gender  equality  policy.  This  explained  how 
 collaboration  

115

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4_3116 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

worked  in  a  specific  time  span.  Hubert  and  Stratigaki  (2016)  illustrated 
how gender equality networks produced a common understanding of what 
gender equality means and collaborated to push gender mainstreaming for-
ward.  Against  this  background,  this  chapter  addresses  the  factors  that 
altered the Roadmap policy process from the actors’ perspective.

Haas  (1992:  3)  characterised  epistemic  communities  as  ‘a  common 
policy enterprise—that is a set of common practices associated with a set 
of problems to which their professional competence is directed, presum-
ably out of the conviction that human welfare will be enhanced as a con-
sequence’.  This  notion  also  applies  to  gender  equality  policy-making 
where the velvet triangle followed ‘a set of common practices’ to ‘enhance 
human welfare’, in this case gender equality.

What  happens  if  actors’  expectations  about  common  practices  drift 
apart  and  become  contradictory?  How  does  this  affect  policy-making 
itself?  The  following  sections  explore  how  actors  continue  to  interpret 
policy content and processes. I will examine the meaning actors draw from 
their personal understanding of the policy process and the actions between 
each  other.  The  way  actors  reconstruct  and  interpret  policy  processes 
and—more importantly—why they do so in a particular way, impacts pol-
icy development and policy outcomes.

From  a  feminist  institutionalist  perspective  we  know  that  actors  and 
their  practices  are  constrained  by  structures  and  that  these  constraints 
limit  certain  choices  and  actions  (Chappell  and  Waylen  2013;  MacKay 
et al. 2010). Historical institutionalists, for instance, use the concept of 
path-dependency, the argument that ‘past events influence future events’ 
(Mahoney  2000:  510).  This  helps  to  explain  institutional  power  rela-
tions—how they usually stabilise institutions and the way they often only 
allow incremental change (Kenny 2007). We want to take this argument 
further and ask: What happens if actors rely on path-dependency, but the 
powerful actors change the path, i.e. the rules of the game? By taking the 
actors’  perspective  and  understanding  how  they  interpret  processes,  we 
reveal  details  of  incremental  institutional  changes  that  have  significant 
unintended consequences.

I follow Thelens’ (1999; 2003) suggestion of examining institutional 
stability and change as a dynamic and historical process. I will demonstrate 
how actors are predominantly aware of their own working environment 
and  rarely  of  the  other  spheres  of  EU  horizontal  and  vertical  policy- 
making. My interviews show that actors who were involved in EU gover-
nance  usually  had  a  basic  knowledge  about  the  Commission’s  internal 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES 

  117

workings. However, they lacked knowledge about the specific constraints 
(of  the  individual  and  institution)  and  the  reasons  for  the  individual’s 
choice of action. The same applied to the reverse: very few Commission 
officials  were  able  to  fully  comprehend  how  and  why  actors  who  were 
external to the Commission acted in a specific way. This mutual lack of 
knowledge about rules, resources and routines is relevant as policy issues 
are full of meaning. The interviews reveal—and this is the main discovery 
of this chapter—that network actors attribute meaning to policy processes 
by  claiming  that  actors  interact  according  to  common  expectations  or 
against them. The meaning attributed to policy developments continue to 
feed back into the on-going process and interpretation of the policy con-
tent. This is one of the reasons why sociological approaches to the EU 
have returned to an actor-centred research programme. In Niilo Kauppis 
(2011: 150–151) words:

The EU does not do anything by itself; it is people as everyday political agents 
who make the EU happen. To understand the EU as a distinctive form of social 
organization and power structure, its influence and the effects of its politics, 
one has get inside the politics to know who the individuals and groups making 
up the EU are, where they come from, what kinds of resources and networks they 
have access to, how they perceive their roles, the institutions in which they work 
and, more broadly, the social world around them.

Based on this premise this chapter reveals that actors often expected 
different interactions in the policy process leading to the Roadmap. They 
often described the rather unexciting steps of the policy process in con-
flicting terms. It also demonstrates how and why actors generated an indi-
vidual interpretation of the policy process, what role they played in relation 
to other actors, and what narratives they constructed. These actor-centred 
interpretations are related to the broader context of EU gender equality 
policy-making. The analysis follows the timeline of the Roadmap policy 
process in three consecutive periods: the initial period, the drafting pro-
cess and the period after its adoption. Following the timeline allows us to 
observe the shifting power among actors in their attempts to influence the 
policy  process.  During  the  initial  period  the  ground  was  prepared  for 
diverging interpretations. Here political leaders played the main role in 
steering  the  policy  process.  During  the  drafting  period  the  role  of  the 
Gender Equality Unit and the European Women’s Lobby (EWL) set the 
scene for different interpretations. It shows how the policy network started 

118 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

to deteriorate. The last period comprises the time after the adoption of the 
Roadmap. It highlights the result of the different interpretations which 
culminated in depoliticising the process and in ambivalent developments 
in the EP and among member states’ representatives.

Each time span reveals different actor interpretations within the larger 
institutional and structural context of EU gender equality policy-making. 
This  contextualisation  helps  to  explain  why  choosing  to  publish  the 
Roadmap as a Commission communication resulted in limiting the num-
ber  of  institutional  actors  which  were  involved  in  negotiating  supra- 
national EU gender equality policy. While actors had certain choices the 
tendency  to  prioritise  standard  EU  policy-making  rules  over  previous 
informal collaborations changed the routines in which actors collaborated 
in EU gender equality policy—to the disadvantage of the policy itself.

3.1 

  Fertilising the soil—ConFidenCe 

Versus unCertainty during the initial Period

The initial period of the Roadmap process only started while the previous 
framework  strategy  was  unexpectedly  extended  for  one  more  year  till 
2006. The extended framework strategy, together with the unknown sta-
tus of the Roadmap, created expectations about the future gender equality 
policy and the actions of the Commission necessary. Not surprisingly, the 
expectations and hopes of different actors varied in view of the included 
policy areas and the planned actions. However, unexpectedly two com-
pletely different interpretations—confidence and uncertainty—were prev-
alent among a small number of actors before the drafting process started 
in 2005. These different interpretations can be explained by the actors’ 
knowledgeability—the knowledge that is bounded to their specific institu-
tional setting.

On  the  one  hand,  Commission  officials  who  were  managing  the 
Roadmap  process  stated  that  something  like  a  policy  programme  had 
already  been  announced  in  the  adopted  social  agenda.  Therefore,  the 
drafting process was described as a logical necessity:

In the Commission we knew that we had to do another document after the 
framework strategy because this was decided and clearly put in the social 
agenda  that  was  previous  to  the  [Roadmap],  I  think  it  was  adopted  in 
2005. So there was already a commitment by the Commission. (Commission 
official 6:56)

3.1  FERTILISING THE SOIL—CONFIDENCE VERSUS UNCERTAINTY 

  119

From the point of view of the content and the basis where we came from, we 
previously  had  a  strategy  on  gender  equality,  so  this  was  really  the  basis. 
(Commission official 11:16)

I think in 2004 we probably started our consultation, some kind of informal 
chats. And in 2005 at our women’s committee meetings we had representatives. 
(…)The  earlier  you’re  involved  in  lobbying  and  in  consultation  the  better. 
(Social Partner representative 31:110)

Commission civil servants who were involved in the core circle of the 
interservice group on gender mainstreaming and members of the interinsti-
tutional groups were confident about the next policy programme. Their 
confidence was built on their knowledge ‘about the conditions of reproduc-
tion of the society [the organisation] of which he or she is a member’ (Giddens 
1979: 5). Their confidence in setting up a new strategy was unquestioned.
The second interpretation clearly opposed the first one as it presented 
the initial period as a time of uncertainty about gender equality policy in 
general and a new policy programme in particular. This interpretation was 
provided by members of the FEMM committee and NGO representatives. 
They were afraid that the Commission would not come up with a new 
gender equality policy programme. They were convinced that there was an 
urgent requirement to lobby for a new programme:

A: We did our own strategy paper, and then we sent it around and we did a lot 
of lobbying before because we feared that there wouldn’t be anything, so that was 
the first step—to lobby. Because there was a long period of—I don’t know—I 
think one year, where we weren’t sure whether there would be a new one.
Q: After the framework.
A: Yes. So really a lot of lobbying so that there would be something. And this is 
also why we chose to do the shadow Roadmap because we weren’t sure, and we 
thought that if we do this that would be more of a push for them to do something. 
But then, once they were negotiating, we were not involved. (NGO representa-
tive 29: 90)

Because … the idea of having a Roadmap was put forward by Barroso in the 
meeting we had with some representatives of the women’s rights committee of 
the  Parliament.  Because  they  were  concerned  about  the  fact  that  gender 
equality  was  lacking  this  ability  was  losing  momentum  and  so  on  and  so 
forth. So the  promise of  the President was  to  come up with a Roadmap on 
gender  equality  and  that  this  Roadmap  would  cover  all  the  policies. 
(Commission official 6: 44)

120 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

The  quotation  from  the  NGO  representative  shows  how  upset  and 
uncertain NGO representatives were about the future of gender equality 
policy. They doubted the responsibility of the Commission as an essential 
political actor. The statement also shows that NGO representatives were 
convinced that their lobbying activities were vital for starting the drafting 
process. The second quotation shows that the Commission’s political top 
level, as well as the administrative level in the Commission, knew about 
the anxieties and the responsibility others assigned to the Commission for 
gender  equality  policy.  However,  the  phrase  ‘and  so  on  and  so  forth’ 
sounded irritated or annoyed when describing the concerns of MEPs.

Back then the context for gender equality policy-making had changed 
considerably  in  the  European  Parliament.  This  was  mainly  due  to  the 
enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe which resulted in a more con-
servative composition of the EP. In this respect it is necessary to under-
stand the uncertainty of the NGO representative and FEMM members 
about the future of gender equality policy in view of the history of gender 
equality policy and their previous involvement. An NGO representative 
who followed the development of gender equality policy for a long time 
compared the Roadmap process with its predecessor, the framework strat-
egy, and concluded that the process had changed:

Well, I don’t know, I think the previous one [the framework], it was quite auto-
matic that they were preparing a new one. But here the signs were not very clear. 
(NGO representative 29: 98)

In  the  representative’s  experience  preparing  gender  equality  policy 
programmes was a routine activity in the EU. Actors who were usually 
involved in this policy area were informed and, more significantly, they 
were  informed  about  steps  taken  by  the  Commission.  Therefore,  the 
NGO representative expected to be informed in time about the drafting 
of the Roadmap (or indeed regarding any other gender equality policy 
 programme). The NGO representative believed that the drafting process 
would be similar to the previous framework strategy. However, it devi-
ated  from  the  expected  routines.  The  deviation  from  former  routines 
caused uncertainty on the part of the NGO representative who had the 
impression that they had to become extraordinarily active and lobby for 
another policy programme. The statement shows that the NGO repre-
sentative had a certain understanding of gender equality policy routines 
from  previous  engagements.  S/he  had  a  practical  consciousness  about 

3.1  FERTILISING THE SOIL—CONFIDENCE VERSUS UNCERTAINTY 

  121

the routine of setting up gender equality policy programmes and s/he 
was  ready  to  reproduce  a  certain  institutional  routine.  S/he  implicitly 
referred to the routine and formulated irritation that it was abandoned in 
the ongoing policy process. When the expectation about the routine of 
setting up gender equality policy programmes was not fulfilled, s/he also 
changed their routine. As s/he had no knowledge about how and why 
the  Commission  and  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  as  their  main  contact 
point  changed  their  routine,  the  NGO  representative  saw  the  initial 
period as a time of uncertainty.

The contradictory interpretations must be understood as expressions of 
actors’ bounded knowledgeability. Knowledgeability has a spatial breadth. 
Commission  officials  were  aware  of  their  environment  regarding 
Commission activities and had a basic knowledge about other institutions, 
e.g. MEPs were concerned about the future gender equality policies. The 
same  applied  to  the  FEMM  members  and  NGO  representatives.  They 
knew who in the Commission had the power to back up the next gender 
equality policy programme. However, they were unable to evaluate the 
exact workings of the Commission and its specific constraints for the indi-
vidual and the institution.

Consequently, the Commission officials were only aware of their own 
working environment and thereby constructed their specific interpretation 
by taking the social agenda as the earliest evidence of the future Roadmap. 
The Commission official mentioned that this early sign played a role in the 
informal  meeting  of  FEMM  members  and  the  Commission  president 
Barroso in March 2005. The social agenda had actually been adopted on 
9th February 2005, about one month before the meeting took place. The 
FEMM  members  could  have  known  about  the  Roadmap  prior  to  the 
meeting, as the Commission civil servants knew the content of the social 
agenda at that point. Nonetheless, the reference to the social agenda that 
the Commission officials perceived as a clear signal may have appeared as 
rather  vague  to  non-Commission  actors.  While  a  policy  or  action 
 programme  was  not  directly  mentioned  in  the  social  agenda,  the  text 
included the phrase: ‘as the current framework strategy 2000–2005 comes to 
an  end,  the  Commission  will  draw  up  a  communication  on  future  policy 
developments proposing action in order to tackle these weaknesses’ (European 
Commission 2005: 10).

Apart from the fairly vague wording, the timing and parliamentary pro-
cedures can explain why FEMM members were concerned as to whether 
or  not  there  would  be  a  new  policy  programme.  At  the  time  of  

122 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

the meeting with the Commission president Barroso they were probably 
not even aware of the content of the social agenda due to the formal pro-
cedures  and  divided  responsibilities  in  the  European  Parliament.  The 
social agenda did not fall under the responsibility of the FEMM commit-
tee;  instead,  the  parliamentary  Committee  on  Employment  and  Social 
Affairs (EMPL) was appointed as the responsible committee for employ-
ment and social affairs. The FEMM committee was only appointed to give 
an opinion on 23rd November 2005, almost nine months after the meet-
ing with the Commission president. This means that prior to the meeting 
with the Commission president the FEMM committee had only limited 
possibilities  to  know  anything  about  the  new  gender  equality  policy 
programme.

In comparison to the FEMM committee the chances of the European 
Women’s Lobby of finding the reference to a new gender equality policy 
programme in the social agenda were probably even lower. The Commission 
publishes around 2000–3000 legislative documents annually. The number 
of soft law publications, like the social agenda or the Roadmap, is much 
higher and—even for insiders—not easy to keep up with. As a rule, the 
EWL followed the activities and publications of the Gender Equality Unit 
in DG Employment. A different unit within DG Employment, which was 
not their contact point, published the social agenda. To monitor all publi-
cations from all DG Employment Units probably appeared impossible due 
to the resources available to the EWL (Greenwood 2007; Lang 2009). 
Therefore, the reference in the social agenda on the future of EU gender 
equality policy programmes became invisible for NGOs.

Apart from the two opposing interpretations, the majority of those who 
participated later on in the general (internal, external or interinstitutional) 
drafting process did not have any interpretation about the initial period. 
They expressed no surprise or expectation or had forgotten about it and 
simply  acknowledged  that  the  Roadmap  was  finally  prepared  and 
published:

Where did the Roadmap originate? I don’t know really, I can’t answer this 
question. (Expert Group representative 9:72)

A: I don’t remember the process… but we usually … had the interservice group 
before, so the interservice group itself was the basis for preparing the Roadmap.
Q: But do you remember when you started discussing it?
A: No not really. (Commission official 19:58–60)

3.1  FERTILISING THE SOIL—CONFIDENCE VERSUS UNCERTAINTY 

  123

Q: Do you know where the idea of the Roadmap was developed first?
A: No, I don’t know. (MEP 3:95–96)

[Pause]  I  am  trying  to  remember  how  we  set  up  the  Roadmap  [Pause]. 
(Member state representative 28:56)

During the initial period the most crucial element appeared to be the 
role of the political leaders; an aspect that is further examined in the next 
section in order to understand its overall relevance.

3.1.1 

  The Role of the Political Leaders

The  Commission  president  played  a  major  role  in  the  initial  period  by 
providing  the  name  of  the  Roadmap;  a  fact  that  was  mentioned  by  a 
FEMM  member.  The  meeting  of  FEMM  members  with  Commission 
president Barroso and Commissioner Špidla was also seen as a major con-
tributing factor towards assuring support for the Roadmap. Some attrib-
uted the existence of the Roadmap to recurring requests by the FEMM 
committee:

I think it started, as I described [earlier] how some issues can start with some 
members, it grows and perhaps you start with a question to the Council or the 
Commission. It could be good if we had a document like a Roadmap, you start 
talking about it. I think it started like that and the Commission thought: ‘Ok, 
it could be a very good example’. (MEP 3:98)

Further above aquote (cf. 3.1) describes why the Commission changed 
the name from ‘framework strategy’ to Roadmap and demonstrates the 
fact  that  it  happened  in  a  meeting  with  members  of  the  FEMM 
 committee.  The  way  in  which  the  Commission  official  described  the 
occasion  and  the  terms  was  significant  because  individual  names  were 
not often used during the interviews. Most of the interviewees refer to 
‘the Commission’ instead of a specific DG, ‘Parliament’ rather than the 
FEMM committee or individual MEPs and ‘DG Employment’ instead of 
the unit responsible for gender equality policy. Therefore, we can assume 
that  when  individuals  are  named  they  have  special  significance  for 
interviewees.

In the context of EU integration, the statement can be interpreted as 
an aim to heighten the overall importance of the Roadmap. It is necessary 

124 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

to bear in mind that the Roadmap is ‘only’ a Commission communication, 
e.g. it is soft law without any direct application for the national legislation 
of  member  states.  Commission  president  Barroso  and  Commissioner 
Špidla  were  powerful  and  prestigious  (male)  political  leaders,  whose 
involvement can be interpreted as a notion of ‘symbolic power’ (Bourdieu 
1984) and an expression of ‘hegemonic masculinity’ (Connell 1995). For 
Commission officials the engagement of Commission president Barroso 
and  his  decision  on  the  name  for  the  policy  programme  signified  the 
importance of the Roadmap, as this top-level support was needed to pull 
together the top-level attendance of general directors or unit heads in the 
initial meeting of the internal Roadmap drafting process.

However, the reason why Barroso participated in the initial period is 
not necessarily due to his personal interest. Instead, another occasion at 
the same time had the unintended consequence of pressuring the top-level 
meeting with FEMM members:

Ricardo Buttiglione was up for position of Commissioner, from Italy and the 
Berlusconi Group of course. (…) Ricardo Buttiglione went on saying ‘women 
should be kept to the kitchen and homosexuals should be parked and chemically 
castrated’. I mean the uproar was crazy. And Berlusconi said to Schulz: ‘… I 
mean the role would be perfect for playing concentration camp guard’. I mean 
the  PR  disaster  was  of  a  magnitude  unheard  of.  I  mean  they  looked  and 
sounded like Mussolini and hillbillies and the backlash is still felt now. Barroso 
is a very adroit politician, … he knows what he’s doing. And he’s trying to make 
the thing work which is very good. And one … of the actions that were actually 
generated by this uproar was enhancing a Roadmap, … with more stamina, 
more vibrance. (Commission official 25:107)

The uproar caused by Buttiglione’s sexist and homophobic comments 
was seen as a driver for the participation of the Commission’s top-level and 
their  overall  commitment  to  EU  gender  equality  policy.  Typically,  this 
aspect was emphasised with a view to the powerful role of the EP and of 
the FEMM committee in approving or rejecting the Commission. Parallel 
events  in  the  broader  context  of  EU  integration,  the  powerful  role  of 
(male)  political  leaders  and  the  way  they  fed  into  the  gender  equality 
policy- making routines demonstrates the opening up of new possibilities.
In summary, in the initial period of setting up the Commission Roadmap 
communications  only  a  small  number  of  actors  were  engaged  in  policy- 
making. Opposite perspectives of this period affected the following periods 
and led to even more contrasting interpretations, as the next section shows.

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  125

3.2 

  draFting the roadmaP: a usual, modiFied or 

deViant ProCess?

While the initial period was characterised by the role of political leaders 
and opposite interpretations about the likelihood of a new strategy, the 
following  drafting  process  focused  on  the  crucial  role  of  the  Gender 
Equality  Unit  and  the  EWL.  While  the  role  of  the  Gender  Equality 
Unit was one of ‘wrong ownership’, the EWL’s role was characterised 
by facing ‘closed doors’. The Gender Equality Unit was simply not in 
the position to force other DGs to fulfil their treaty obligation; it rather 
used  a  formal  Commission  tool  to  share  responsibility  and  remind 
reluctant DGs of their gender mainstreaming duty. However, the over-
all  ownership  remained  with  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  and  was  not 
shared. The EWL had a good network and actively sought to involve as 
many  actors  as  possible  from  outside  the  Commission  to  lobby  the 
Commission. However, they failed to lobby every single Commission 
DG  involved  in  the  drafting  of  the  Roadmap  and  access  via  DG 
Employment was denied.

The usual policy-making process between these two core actors dete-
riorated. How the actors’ network related to the disconnection is illus-
trated by three overlapping actors’ descriptions of a standard process: the 
suitable standard process, the modified standard process and the irritating 
deviant process.

3.2.1 

  The Suitable Standard Process

The first interpretation includes positions of mainly Commission officials 
who compare the Roadmap communication with their experience of other 
Commission communications. Although the process of the Roadmap was 
typical for Commission procedures, one important difference remained: 
the vast majority of communications concerned one or a few DGs, whereas 
the  Roadmap  communication  involved  all  DGs.  Commission  officials 
referred to gender mainstreaming or to gender equality as a transversal 
policy field when they stressed the singularity of the Roadmap process. 
Civil servants from DG Employment also explained that, to some extent, 
the Roadmap differed from everyday routines, even though they followed 
typical  administrative  routines.  They  explained  the  reasons  why  they 
intended to include all DGs as a tool to develop a sort of corporate respon-
sibility for the Roadmap:

126 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

And what we wanted to achieve with this was that each of the units here in the 
DG Employment, but also each of the DGs would feel responsible and would feel 
that they were the masters of parts of the Roadmap. And that’s why we decided 
to work really for specific objectives in the Roadmap, that would be clear and 
where  each  DG  could  identify  itself.  So  this  was  one  of  the  things  we  really 
wanted to have. And I think it was very important that they were involved 
since the beginning in this process and that they could participate in an active 
way. (Commission official 6:26)

The quote illustrates that the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment 
interpreted the process as something innovative, yet firmly rooted in the 
formal rules of the Commission. They were truly relieved that their appli-
cation  of  gender  mainstreaming  rules  was  successful  and  were  satisfied 
when they achieved their aim to involve other units from DG Employment, 
as well as other DGs. Although they were aware of their central role the 
Gender Equality Unit saw that other actors needed to identify with the 
Roadmap. One technique they explicitly interpreted as a successful ele-
ment of the policy process was the initial top-level meeting:

I  think  …  the  fact  of  having  this  [the  first  meeting]…  at  the  Directorate 
General level was very good because then you are pushed to produce something 
and  to  come  up  with  ideas  and  activities,  so  I  think  it  was  a  good  process. 
(Commission official 6:76)

From the statements of different Commission officials we can conclude 
that they particularly considered the involvement of the Commission pres-
ident Barroso and the initial top-level meeting as a guarantee for the suc-
cess of the internal adoption process. Those who organised the top-level 
meeting were quite aware of the different setting—that they could only 
discuss the general outline and parts of the Roadmap, rather than details 
about policy area contributions.

So … the structure of the draft communication was really short to see if there 
was an agreement and the division that we decided … suited everyone, so it was 
a very good meeting. But I think it was very important that the level was higher 
than just officials—head of units and sometimes directors—because there was a 
strong commitment. (Commission official 6:22)

The emphasis that the proposed structure ‘suited everyone’ shows that 
the  Gender  Equality  Unit  wanted  to  meet  everyone’s  expectations  and 
avoid conflicts by presenting an acceptable compromise to the other DGs.

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  127

In the follow-up all Commission officials agreed that the Roadmap was 
a document which was jointly produced inside the interservice group and 
between the coordinating Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment and 
other DGs (Interviews 33 and 17). The Council and member state repre-
sentatives, as well as the majority of Commission officials, were satisfied 
with  the  standard  process.  They  interpreted  it  as  normal  and  expected. 
When asked about stakeholder consultation or participation, Commission 
officials  were  surprised  or  signalled  incomprehension.  They  emphasised 
the character of a Commission communication which takes publications of 
other stakeholders into account.

Although  drafting  the  Roadmap  looked  like  a  very  formal  process, 
Commission officials also stressed the importance of switching between 
formal and informal negotiations:

In this context I would say that at the beginning you need to be a little bit formal, 
in the sense of … trying to have a Director General (…) to ask things and to 
formalise a little bit, but then to do a lot informally. (…) So I would say that it’s 
very difficult to give advice but the combination of formal and informal contacts 
is very important and to have a lot of contacts with people. Even if you receive 
(…)  the  contribution,  you  always  need  to  go  back  and  see  if  you  have  really 
understood what they want and to discuss it with them. And there is a lot of work. 
And we did it in this case with the interservice group multilaterally, then a lot of 
work bilaterally, especially with some DGs, so I would say that there were infor-
mal contacts that were really important. (Commission official 6:273)

The civil servants from DG Employment were aware of working rou-
tines and policies within other DGs and included this in their approach to 
drafting. However, the quote also discloses the spatial breadth of actors’ 
knowledgeability. Civil servants from DG Employment had a basic knowl-
edge  about  other  DGs,  but  sometimes  they  did  not  understand  what 
another DG actually meant with their proposal for the Roadmap.

Commission officials interpreted the process as a standard internal proce-
dure. They were all satisfied and expected nothing else from themselves or 
DG Employment. There was not even a slight variation in their interpreta-
tion. The fact that drafting the communication was limited to the interservice 
group was not articulated. Therefore, we can conclude that the Commission 
officials never expected the drafting process to go beyond the Commission.

What can be different is which kind of document you are negotiating because 
we were negotiating a communication and other things to negotiate for legisla-
tion. That for sure is different. (Commission official 6:344)

128 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

Likewise, the intention of DG Employment to involve all other DGs 
was never questioned or discussed. It seemed to be accepted as the stan-
dard process, even though it was unusual compared to other Commission 
communications (Interviews 1, 6, 11, and 25).

On  certain  occasions  Commission  officials  expressed  dissatisfaction 
with the process and the resulting policy content; however, this never led 
to a questioning of the overall process:

The Roadmap was generally drafted without consulting us. (…) The document 
was indeed discussed in this group, the one I already talked about, and we made 
comments. But it’s not that everything was taken account of. But I was not very 
satisfied about how Employment took account of it because the categories simply 
did not fit us. (…) It could be that we didn’t react decisively or well enough. 
And it is also not in our interest to mess up proposals of Employment because 
generally speaking they are quite helpful to us. So we had to compromise in some 
way. (Commission official 12: 46, 56, 64)

While the work of the interservice group was viewed positively—despite 
being complex—the formal interservice consultation was seen as a possibly 
problematic. The Commission procedure reduced the negotiation power 
and presented a challenge to previous authoritative resources.

It [the interservice consultation] is kind of tougher because people are less will-
ing to find compromises in a way. Yes, they want to find compromises because 
you  need  to  do  the  document,  but  your  negotiating  power  is  much  lower. 
(Commission official 6:277)

Apart from rules and routines in terms of timing and cooperation, some 
formal rules were perceived as restrictive, e.g. the length of the communi-
cation or budget allocation:

A:  A  communication  means  that  we  have  very  restrictive  rules  in  the 
Commission with wordings, where we cannot really exceed …
Q: Oh really, so what are the rules for such a communication? What is allowed?
A: 22,500 characters. That is very little. And it’s very complex to cover all the 
areas and still make sense on what you say and to have all the commitments, the 
activities, to be detailed and measurable. …
Q: And also all the remarks, which document belongs to this and that …
A: Yes. So everything is very restricted, and of course you cannot include very 
small activities. (Commission official 6:82–86)

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  129

I mean they [the procedures] have become much heavier since the '99 Santer 
Commission fall. So everything to do with spending money in the Commission 
has become almost impossible (…) It’s become really, really sort of demanding 
in  terms  of  procedures  and  all  that,  so  people  are  extremely  careful  (…). 
(Commission official 11:140)

The demands were never questioned and confirmed the interpretation 
as a suitable and standard process. The Commission officials were aware of 
them as part of their everyday routine, they were part of their discursive 
and practical consciousness.

Apart from the routines about timing and cooperation, the so-called 
activity-based management meant more pressure on the Roadmap and 
the gender mainstreaming approach. This rule stipulated what kind of 
activities and proposals can be included in a Commission communica-
tion and the annual Commission working plan. The previous emphasis 
on gender mainstreaming as an overarching rule for the Roadmap draft-
ing  process  within  the  Commission  had  some  unintended,  negative 
consequences in this period. The consequences of gender mainstream-
ing combined with the standard process were interpreted as causing a 
barrier  in  the  formal  interservice  consultation.  Commission  officials 
stated  that  the  supervising  services,  the  non-participating  actors,  nei-
ther  understood  the  logic  of  gender  mainstreaming  nor  the  resulting 
difficulties in defining a quantifiable goal. The activity-based manage-
ment approach required quantifiable targets, clear deadlines and moni-
toring mechanisms for each activity in a Commission communication. 
Many of the Roadmap activities defined more qualitative targets, e.g. 
‘to encourage gender budgeting at local, regional and national level’ or 
‘to encourage and support the work of Social Partners on gender equal-
ity’.  Rather  than  questioning  the  standard  Commission  process,  the 
Commission officials who were responsible for the Roadmap adjusted 
their  proposal  to  the  rules  of  the  activity-based  management.  The 
Gender Equality Unit apparently convinced the service to accept some 
exceptions to the rules:

But it was not so easy to let this pass, once the document was already prepared 
because … when you go to all the other DGs—I’m not talking about the the-
matic DGs but DGs that have the supervision, the control—it’s very difficult to 
make them understand about this gender mainstreaming and why you cannot 
set a date, because it’s not possible. But for the rest, I mean whenever it was pos-
sible, it was really decided to set a date, a deadline. (Interview 6:88)

130 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

A  Commission  official  illustrated  the  struggle  between  the  activity- 
based management approach and qualitative gender mainstreaming with 
the help of the metaphor of evaluating apple pies. The activity-based man-
agement wants to define the number of apple pies; it does not ask whether 
the  apple  pies  are  tasty  or  healthy.  The  qualitative  approach,  however, 
involves the definition of broad, long-term goals, like ‘statements (…) to 
save the planet’.

This work, of course, has to follow the procedures, which is activity-based man-
agement (…) You don’t simply make statements that you’re going to save the 
planet and then go to a kind of peer review with other DGs. You actually make 
commitments which are actually quantified (…) I mean, if you are a cook, you 
would say you were going to make 10 apple pies per month and then there’s a 
possibility to say: ‘Hey, he’s made twelve, that’s good—Hey, he made eight, what 
happened?’ You have an explanation for that. So it’s a process where the room 
for manoeuvre is rather small. (Commission official 25:15)

By definition, gender mainstreaming measures did not necessarily mean 
specific  actions  for  female/male  target  groups.  The  actions  were  often 
dedicated to other topics and gender equality was pursued together with 
other goals. However, the mixture of different goals was not acceptable 
for  the  monitoring  requirements  of  the  activity-based  management 
approach. Also, the way these central services approached the topic reveal 
how labels like ‘male’ and ‘female’ are still attributed in the interaction 
between gender equality actors and ‘mainstream’ actors. The supervision 
units see gender equality as irrational, because it does not follow the eco-
nomic logic of quantifiable goals.

Usually  we  don’t  have  a  project  called  ‘Fighting  gender-based  stereo-
types—€150.000’ …and then you say oh, yeah, right. Because we have a lot of 
cross-cutting projects which could be interpreted as possibly promoting gender 
equality and then you have to see what’s happening …. that’s a problem with 
monitoring the results. (Commission official 25:83)

Not surprisingly the entire internal Commission drafting process was 
heavy and complicated. Despite the interpretation as a suitable standard 
process, the drafting of the Roadmap became difficult and time consum-
ing, something that was not disclosed by Commission officials, yet was 
noticed by external actors:

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  131

I know who was responsible in the Commission to coordinate, to write and after-
wards people said, it was extremely exhausting, it was dreadful work. (…) But 
how this process took place, I don’t know. (Expert Group representative 9:72)

A: (…) I think it was difficult with the internal negotiations.
Q: Inside the Commission? Not with the member states?
A: No, no, member states were not involved. Because it was each DG that made 
a proposal, that had to be accepted by each Commissioner, I guess. And that, I 
heard, was pretty difficult. (NGO representative 29:86–88)

Commission officials saw the involvement of stakeholders as a suitable 
standard process and made a clear distinction between the internal and 
external process. They never questioned the legitimacy to limit the process 
to the Commission. Consequently, they interpreted the consideration of 
stakeholders’  documents  as  a  sign  of  involving  them  sufficiently  in  the 
drafting process. They did not interpret the consultation as a way of meet-
ing with stakeholders, but as a technical step of comparing their own drafts 
with the positions of others:

So for us, when we saw this shadow Roadmap, in a way we had the vision of 
the civil society in this organisation on gender equality, so we had some ideas 
of what they wanted. Of course, I mean, we are the Commission, they are 
civil  society,  member  states  are  member  states,  but  it’s  very  important  to 
have this feedback and to see that there are common views and things to be 
shared. (…) The other thing that we really looked at was also all the reports 
of Parliament on gender equality and the various subjects, like reconcilia-
tion  or  other  things.  (…)  So  this  is,  let’s  say,  the  external.  (Commission 
official 6:22)

The argument that reading political positions reflects a way of consulta-
tion and involvement of other actors seems to be a common understand-
ing among representatives of the major EU institutions, not only among 
Commission officials:

I do think just on the Roadmap, it’s an example but it’s probably not the … 
strongest example of negotiations because it’s not … it’s still something that’s the 
Commission’s baby as it were. (Social Partner representative 31:188)

When we have initiative report, we have a lot of recommendations inside a reso-
lution. And I am sure that the Roadmap is a response to all these, all these 
requests addressed to the Commission. (MEP 14:67)

132 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

The last quote shows how the MEP was busy with the EP process and 
did not really think about how and why the Commission picked up sug-
gestions. S/he thought that the FEMM resolutions and initiative reports 
put so much pressure on the Commission that anything coming from the 
Commission was a response to the activities in the EP.

3.2.2 

  The Modified Standard Process

A broad range of actors from different institutional backgrounds developed 
a second interpretation: a modified standard process on the basis of their 
experience in gender equality policy-making. They compared the Roadmap 
process with their experience with gender equality policy- making back then. 
Interpretations about the standard process differed in terms of collaboration 
and consultation with external actors. Regardless of whether they were from 
the Commission or not, many interviewees not only expected such a consul-
tation, they were indeed entirely convinced that the Gender Equality Unit 
of DG Employment met with representatives of stakeholders, particularly 
with the Social Partners and the European Women’s Lobby:

Yeah, they [European Women’s Lobby] would have played a very strong role in 
the Roadmap. But probably other NGOs via the social platform (…). And then 
you would have the national women’s council organisation from the member 
states. The Advisory Committee and an equal opportunities office would have 
been involved (…). And then probably national member states’ organisations, 
equality bodies and the like would probably also have had an input. Possibly the 
employers’  organisations  would  have  been  involved  and  then  maybe  other 
organisations, like older workers or whatever would be aware of gender equal-
ity…(…) But the [European Women’s] Lobby would have been a strong player 
in this. (Social Partner representative 31:122)

The Roadmap? Oh, there is an official sort of [consultation procedure] (…) it 
was very close to the [European Women’s] Lobby at the time, but I mean it is the 
responsibility of DG Employment basically. (Commission official 11:102)

I think that the Commission had a lot of consultations and negotiations, before 
the  final  version.  (…)  And  who  it’s  consulting,  it’s  all  the  time,  you  know, 
NGOs, European Women’s Lobby certainly, and then the Advisory Committee. 
(Council representative 5:52–56)

The statements were made by interviewees who had been involved in 
gender equality policy for a long time. Their comments are related to their 

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  133

experience and the time they spent in this policy area. In their comments 
they implicitly replicated expectations from their previous experience, as a 
discursive expression of their practical consciousness. They expected that 
previous process routines would be reproduced.

The  following  quotes  illustrate  that  narratives  from  inside  the 
Commission about the external process displayed an equal lack of knowl-
edge of what was happening with collaboration. Even Commission offi-
cials  were  convinced  that  a  high  number  of  external  actors  actively 
participated in the drafting of the Roadmap:

I  know  that  there  was  advice  from  different  bodies,  of  course  the  European 
Women’s Lobby, (…) the High Level Group, the Advisory Committee. I know 
also that we have received opinion from the Social Economic Committee and the 
Committee of the Regions. So the main bodies outside the Commission have also 
participated.

Q: But before it was adopted or during the preparation process?
A: It was mainly during the preparation process. I’m not sure about all, 
maybe some have been received just after it was adopted, but I think it was… 
from what was reported to me, it was something like really… a type of moment 
… I mean all those opinions and so on were brought together. (Commission 
official 33:58–60)

There was a public consultation on that and so the Advisory Committee pro-
vided  an  opinion  …  you  see  the  interaction,  you  cannot  say,  ok  the  idea  of 
developing that and that is coming from that explicit party, there is a lot of 
discussion, interaction, dialogue also with civil society, because the civil society 
is  participating  in  the  Advisory  Committee  through  the  European  Women’s 
Lobby. (Commission official 32:28)

The quotes are from Commission civil servants with a long experience 
in EU gender equality policy who changed their jobs during the Roadmap 
drafting process. We can learn from the statements how the retrospective 
perspective culminated in a narrative that contradicted the actual formal 
process. The Committee of the Regions, for instance, provided its opinion 
after  the  adoption  of  the  Roadmap,  as  stipulated  in  the  formal  process. 
There  was  no  public  consultation  and  the  opinion  of  the  Advisory 
Committee arrived at a stage when the internal Commission drafting pro-
cess was almost finished. Crucial factors for understanding these statements 
are time and space. In terms of time both Commission civil servants were 
experienced in gender equality policy and constructed their narrative based 
on  their  previous  experiences  of  setting  up  gender  equality  policy.  

134 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

In terms of space both Commission civil servants changed their location 
during the drafting process—one left before consultations took place, the 
other arrived when the drafting process was almost over. The fluctuation of 
personnel played a crucial role for the interpretation of the policy process.
It is remarkable that representatives of the Advisory Committee did not 
present a consistent narrative about their role. One member state repre-
sentative struggled to answer the question about his/her involvement:

I’m supposed to know… I was there, I can’t tell you that I wasn’t. It’s incredi-
ble, but I don’t remember, because it’s true that… I guess that we had input to 
make in the Advisory Committee, but… I don’t really remember.  (Member 
state representative 26:67)

Who was consulted and when also played a major role in the third inter-

pretation of the drafting process: the irritating deviant process.

3.2.3 

  The Irritating Deviant Process

Several actors were irritated that the process developed in a different way 
than they had expected from their experience of setting up previous EU 
gender equality policy programmes. They were quite ambivalent and dis-
illusioned  about  the  Commission  procedure,  even  though  they  some-
times did not have any specific knowledge about the procedures. A civil 
servant  from  the  European  Parliament  was  dissatisfied  with  being 
excluded  from  the  drafting  process.  S/he  assumed  that  only  one  civil 
servant in the Gender Equality Unit drafted the communication and that 
the Commission interservice group on gender equality was not consulted 
either:

Well, in my view, a highly qualified person, absolutely, a great worker, com-
pletely isolated in his/her work. This was the work of a’ library rat’. S/he thought 
that s/he didn’t even need to meet anyone because everything was in different 
documents and it was an emerging question. So the nature of the Roadmap 
didn’t call for a lot of exchange because there is in fact a consultation before the 
Roadmap? No. (EP official 23:152)

Like many others this interviewee only had a limited understanding of 
internal Commission procedures. S/he developed an interpretation that 
also helped to explain the unsatisfactory content of the Roadmap from the 
EP official’s perspective.

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  135

An expert group representative stated that they had suggested that DG 
Employment should organise a meeting of the expert group with other 
DGs to discuss possible contributions. Although the suggestion was quite 
enthusiastically welcomed, it was not realised. The last sentence expresses 
an ambivalent interpretation, almost a resignation about the outcome—
that despite the enthusiasm nothing happened.

We discussed during that year with [name], this Roadmap, whether it would 
not be necessary to get together with other DGs and see in terms of gender main-
streaming what they need to do for the policy areas they are responsible for. And 
[name] said: Yes, that would be indeed a great idea! And that’s it. Nothing 
happened. (Expert Group representative 9: 135)

The EWL in particular suggested some specific content and often inter-
preted their suggestions as ultimate. They came to nothing despite their 
attempts to consult:

At that time t the first draft was circulating [in the Advisory Committee], 
quite a lot of our points were in there, but when it came to the real proposal, the 
Commission just removed many of those points. And then it [the communica-
tion] was easier [for them] because it was not binding. (NGO representative 
29: 116)

The quote helps to understand the final content of the Roadmap. In 
its shadow Roadmap the EWL (similar to the member state representa-
tives) suggested several ambitious activities and several legislative pro-
posals for different policy areas, such as pensions, private and professional 
life  balance,  violence  against  women,  women  and  education,  gender 
equality  and  the  media  (European  Women’s  Lobby  2005).  None  of 
these  was  included.  In  the  beginning  of  the  drafting  process  the 
Commission  civil  servants  included  these  ambitious  suggestions  and  
the EWL was satisfied for the time being. The more binding elements 
were only subsequently removed in the ‘real proposal’, at a point in time 
when  it  became  too  late  for  stakeholders,  such  as  the  EWL,  to  lobby 
effectively for their inclusion.

A trade union representative who interpreted the process as irritating 
was  not  entirely  surprised  by  the  removal  of  ambitious  content.  S/he 
explained the changed process with a reference to the internal Commission 
power relations:

136 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

 Q: When you say there’s pressure from the Commission, does it mean that DG 
Employment is under pressure from other DGs?
A: Not to come up with very strong demands.
Q: Not to set out very strong demands because … they have other priorities and 
they have more power?
A: Exactly.
Q: And who would you say has the power to decide which …?
A:  It  depends.  Some  of  the  DGs  are  quite  strong  in  the  content  and  in  the 
instruments and the subjects they’re tackling. But it also … there’s an element 
within the Commission, certain Commissioners are very strong and very force-
ful.  Some  other  Commissioners  have  a  lot  of  national  pressure  or  support  to 
drive things forward. (Social Partner representative 31:57–62)

In many interviews DG Employment was perceived as a less powerful 
directorate and the Commissioner as comparatively weak. This was implic-
itly (and almost never explicitly) used as an explanation for the Roadmap’s 
policy implications:

The Commissioner himself is a very kind man, very clever and all that (…). He 
hasn’t got a lot of authority. (Commission official 11:38)

For  this  Commissioner  …  [gender  equality]  is  not  his  number  one  priority. 
(Social Partner representative 31:64)

Well, Špidla was pushing, the Commissioner was pushing sometimes. But he was 
not extremely powerful within the Commission. (NGO representative 29:240)

We could have expected that the interinstitutional groups were satis-
fied,  as  both  sides—the  representatives  from  the  Commission  and  the 
interinstitutional groups—confirmed that they were consulted. However, 
consultation in this context seemed to have been limited to lobbying the 
Gender Equality Unit without having the power to decide what was taken 
into account and what was not:

They [the interinstitutional groups] were made of very competent people, very 
active people, but in the end it was the Commission itself which was to decide the 
agenda. And even if we could try to influence, discuss, make proposals, it hap-
pened much more in informal instances, but in the meeting it didn’t happen. 
The Commission writes the agenda, and there is no room to add other topics. 
(Member state representative 28:56)

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  137

The majority of Commission officials (with the exception of the Gender 
Equality Unit) very rarely described their expectations about external con-
tributions.  They  did  not  mention  any  external  processes  or  actors  that 
tried to influence them.

Two explanations help to understand the reasons for the different inter-
pretations. The narratives highlight how the Gender Equality Unit of DG 
Employment was not only the connection between the internal and exter-
nal drafting process the Unit, but also played a crucial role in the way other 
actors  interpreted  the  drafting  process.  The  European  Women’s  Lobby 
also functioned as a hub for the external process during the drafting pro-
cess. From the perspective of all other actors it played a crucial role in the 
external process. The two crucial roles will be examined in detail below.

3.2.4 

  The Crucial Role of the Gender Equality Unit 

and ‘Wrong Ownership’

The decision to set up the Roadmap as a Commission communication and 
not to connect it to an action programme (as in previous years) was a stra-
tegic decision by the Gender Equality Unit. It allowed further actors to 
participate and also offered the chance to limit otherwise obligatory nego-
tiations with the European Parliament, the Council and the Social Partners; 
an obligation that existed for parts of the previous action programmes.

This Roadmap was based on the previous framework strategy and of course it 
does improve some aspects regarding the previous strategy. I think that one of the 
main improvements that could be mentioned is the fact that it’s the commit-
ment of the Commission and it’s not mixing commitments from other bodies 
like social partners or member states. (Commission official 33:40)

Based on Bourdieu’s ideas Mérand (2011: 183) noted that such strate-
gic decisions are driven by ‘getting a feel for the game, knowing the right 
people,  seizing  contingent  opportunities  as  they  arise’  and  ‘instinctively 
know[ing] what is feasible and what is not (…).’ The Gender Equality Unit 
was well aware that choosing the format of a Commission communication 
without an action programme would dispense lengthy consultation proce-
dures with the EP and the Council. Several interviewees mentioned the 
strong time pressure for setting up a policy programme directly after the 
end  of  the  previous  framework  strategy.  The  Gender  Equality  Unit  

138 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

was  probably  aware  that  a  policy  programme  that  would  have  required 
agreement  from  the  EP  and  the  Council  would  not  have  been  feasible 
within the allocated time. The Council interviewee noted that the EP and 
Council  were  getting  used  to  the  so-called  community  method  (previ-
ously known as ‘co-decision procedure’ and since the Treaty of Lisbon in 
2009  so- called  ‘ordinary  legislative  procedure’).  They  only  needed  an 
average of one and a half years to agree on Commission proposals (Golub 
2008; König 2008).

The actions of the Gender Equality Unit also resonate with Putnam’s 
(1988) notion of two-level games, even though the playing field is not 
between a domestic and supranational level, but between the Commission’s 
actors and the external, civil society organisations, the EP and the Council. 
Inside  the  Commission  they  used  the  attention  from  outside  to  push 
through a certain format for the Roadmap. At the same time they played 
‘tied  hands’  to  the  outside  and  insisted  on  closed  procedures  of  the 
Commission.

The  decision  for  a  Commission  communication  was  partly  driven  by 
general changes on EU level (e.g. enlargement) and internal changes of DG 
Employment  (pulling  together  different  programmes  into  PROGRESS). 
These affected the power of the Gender Equality Unit in terms of maintain-
ing control of a specific gender equality policy action programme and the 
subsequent budget where they lost their allocated resources.

A member state representative who was familiar with the internal rou-
tines and rules of the Commission expressed his/her regret that the draft-
ing  and  adoption  process  of  the  Roadmap  did  not  result  in  a  more 
consistent policy approach. In his/her view the Commission civil servants 
could have acted otherwise by developing a better, more ambitious policy 
programme.

I  think  …  they  could  have  had  a  more  coherent  policy  towards  the  whole 
European Union … with the same treaty, even with the same actors… For me 
it’s really a pity and a shame that they could not do better. (Member state rep-
resentative 28:244)

This comment is even more significant against the background of the 
process  in  the  interinstitutional  groups:  the  Advisory  Committee  and 
High Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming. These two groups were the 
only actively involved external actors in drafting the Roadmap. They were 
able  to  estimate  whether  a  particular  aspect  was  acceptable  to  member 

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  139

states, such as the proposed legislation on gender mainstreaming. When 
the member states had to be accepted as the most important veto players 
(next to the Commission and the EP) for proposed legislation (Tsebelis 
2002; Hix 2006), it comes as a surprise that the Commission decided to 
forego legislative proposals from the member states. This would have cer-
tainly been supported by the EP.

Others saw the responsibility with the Commissioner and stated that 
Commission officials were quite aware that gender equality policy stake-
holders were not satisfied:

He [the Commissioner] knows that there is some hostility to this lack of pro- 
activeness of the Commission. (EP official 23:168)

The  awareness  about  stakeholders’  expectations  was  also  reflected  in 
the  Roadmap  impact  assessment.1  The  impact  of  the  explored  policy 
options (see below) take account of possible reactions from stakeholders 
(e.g.  European  Parliament,  Social  Partners  and  civil  society).  Satisfying 
stakeholders was an explicit goal for the EU Commission in the Roadmap 
impact assessment.

So why did the Commission and especially the Gender Equality Unit 
come up with their particular Roadmap proposal? They could have acted 
otherwise, yet they chose not to. The reasons can be found in the working 
routines  of  the  Commission  and  in  the  consequences  for  the  Gender 
Equality Unit: its ‘wrong ownership’.

The Gender Equality Unit’s decision to set up the Roadmap as a com-
munication  was  highly  strategic.  It  represented  a  way  of  getting  the 
Roadmap  adopted  without  resistance  from  inside  or  outside  the 
Commission. The Gender Equality Unit prevented resistance from inside 
the  Commission  by  emphasising  gender  mainstreaming;  it  prevented 
external  resistance  by  emphasising  procedures  which  were  relevant 
for Commission communications. As a result, the Gender Equality Unit 
was quite capable of protecting the scope of gender equality and keeping 
the  status  quo.  A  different  kind  of  legislative  act  might  have  triggered 
more conflict and rebellion inside and outside the Commission. However, 
the self-limitation had the unintended consequence of weakening gender 
equality policy, as it weakened the general policy network and the collabo-
ration between the previous velvet triangle (Woodward 2004).

The Gender Equality Unit decided to divide participation in the draft-
ing  process  into  two  different  paths:  one  communicated  with  internal 

140 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

(other  DGs)  and  interinstitutional  actors  (Advisory  Committee,  High 
Level  Group  on  Gender  Mainstreaming);  the  other  consulted  external 
actors about their political positions and expectations. There was no pre-
cise rule about the consultation and involvement of so-called stakeholders. 
Commission actors could have acted otherwise—they could have invited 
external actors to discuss drafts. Why other DGs decided not to involve 
external stakeholders (with the exception of DG Research) can partly be 
explained by the internal routines and rules that guide drafting Commission 
communications. DG Employment was the lead DG and coordinated the 
contributions of other DGs. However, this strengthened the conviction 
among the other DGs that DG Employment was solely responsible for the 
Roadmap and for EU gender equality policy. DG Employment was also 
expected to participate in the external procedures in the follow-up of the 
Roadmap’s adoption in the Commission.

The non-participating actors from the Commission were also crucial 
for the Roadmap’s adoption: without every DG’s signature the Roadmap 
would have been impossible. Therefore, it is crucial to understand how 
the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment gained support from these 
actors. The policy programme was supported by the Commission presi-
dent as the patron (who provided the name) and by the announcement in 
the  social  agenda  about  the  Commission’s  obligation  to  publish  some-
thing. Subsequently, DG Employment invited the institutional DG leaders 
not only to inform, but also to commit to securing the support and further 
cooperation of civil servants who functioned as gender focal points. Finally, 
DG Employment avoided to interfere with other DG’s business and left 
other DGs to decide the extent to which they wanted to participate. As 
DG Employment was less powerful than DG Trade or DG Competition 
for example, they refrained from pressuring other DGs for more action. 
The top-level support (Barroso, initial high-level meeting) and integration 
into general policies (decision by DGs on what to provide) looked like 
from  a  guide  on  gender  mainstreaming  (Council  of  Europe/Group  of 
Specialists on Mainstreaming 1999).

Interestingly, the Roadmap was mentioned in the social agenda, it was 
a document of DG Employment and not included in a general document 
of  the  Secretariat  General,  the  presidents’  institution.  Documentary 
research also revealed that there was no reference to the Roadmap in any 
other DGs’ documents at that time. If the Roadmap—as the official EU 
policy programme for gender equality—had been of interest to all DGs, 
further DGs should have referenced it in their documents. DG Employment 

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  141

was the only DG to mention a future gender equality policy programme. 
Although DG Employment, especially its Gender Equality Unit, aimed to 
implement gender mainstreaming (GM), they were unsuccessful because 
they were the only ones who felt responsible.

The Commission impact assessment for the Roadmap presented three 

policy options, the first two of which were rejected at an early stage:

 1.  No more action at the supranational EU level: actions would solely rely 

upon member states, Social Partners and civil society.

 2.  Sectoral approach: each Commission DG would be responsible for pro-

 3.  Roadmap:  an  overarching  approach,  similar  to  previous  policy 

moting gender equality.

programmes.

Although  the  impact  assessment  implied  a  different  perspective,  the 
Gender Equality Unit was simply not in the position to force other DGs 
to fulfil their treaty obligation. This depended on the institutional logic of 
the Commission. As every DG has a political and administrative leadership 
and  there  is  no  official  hierarchy  between  the  different  organisational 
branches, the term ‘top-level’ is misleading. There is no such thing as a 
chancellery that has the power to force the other ‘ministries’. The situa-
tion is further complicated by the fact that DGs are led by different nation-
als  who  compete  with  each  other  depending  on  their  political 
affiliation—like the government in their home country and their existing 
national traditions with regard to the policy area (Kauppi 2011). We know 
that  there  is  some  kind  of  international  socialisation,  although  it  is  not 
strong enough to blank out national ties (Hooghe 2005).

While DG Employment wanted gender mainstreaming to involve all 
other DGs and to take the positions of external actors into account, almost 
all other DGs failed to approach the Roadmap and gender equality in the 
same  way.  Despite  feeling  responsible  for  their  part,  they  still  saw  DG 
Employment as the one responsible for the Roadmap. Thus they missed 
the  opportunity  to  set  up  their  own  consultation  process  with  external 
stakeholders. Various DGs ran expert groups in their policy area compa-
rable to the Advisory Committee or the High Level Group on Gender 
Mainstreaming; groups that could at least have provided the opportunity 
to discuss policy issues or goals with member state representatives. DGs 
could have discussed their ideas with groups which were not specifically 
set up for gender equality, but with the ‘normal stakeholders’. They could 

142 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

have  implemented  the  axiomatic  principle  of  gender  mainstreaming  to 
move ‘the attention of gender equality policies to everyday policies and to the 
activities  of  the  actors  ordinarily  involved  in  the  policy  processes  at  stake.’ 
(Council of Europe/Group of Specialists 1999: 12).

This  kind  of  habit  reveals  ‘wrong  ownership’  because  the  Roadmap 
should have been the product of the whole Commission with the owner-
ship of all DGs. However, the ownership stayed with DG Employment 
and was not shared equally with the other participating DGs. As noted 
earlier,  the  reason  can  be  traced  back  to  the  history  of  gender  equality 
policy with employment policies as the starting point and the kind of path- 
dependency from the historical location.

The  problem  of  wrong  ownership  and  the  responsibility  of  DG 
Employment represents a challenge to the gender equality policy network 
and  to  the  implementation  of  gender  mainstreaming  (Schmidt  2005; 
Jacquot  2010).  Some  interviewees  affirmed  that  implementing  gender 
mainstreaming would have required the responsibility for gender equality 
policy to move from a DG that is only responsible for one policy area to 
the Secretariat General2 for instance, where more overarching leadership 
would be possible.

I don’t know, for me the gender, the Gender Equality unit should not be in DG 
Employment. I mean … the Roadmap is for women across all the Commission’s 
policies. To have it in DG Employment is really a reduction. And it doesn’t 
provide this issue with proper tam-tam and the full picture because it produces 
only issues of employment. (…) And I think that they are overwhelmed with 
work. It should be in the Secretary General because it’s a cross-cutting issue if it 
was to be taken seriously by all the boys in the Commission. (Commission offi-
cial 32:35–37)

The quote discloses gendered power relations that influenced the scope 
and impact of gender equality. Why did the coordination of the overall EU 
gender equality policy remain the duty of a Unit in DG Employment and 
why was it never supervised and organised at an overarching level of the 
Secretariat General? Because of ‘all the boys in the Commission’. They 
were  held  accountable  for  not  taking  gender  equality  policy  seriously. 
They were perceived as having had the (symbolic) power (Bourdieu 2005) 
and the allocative and authoritative resources (Giddens 1984) to decide 
on  the  scope  and  impact  of  the  Roadmap  and  on  EU  gender  equality 
policy in general.

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  143

During  the  drafting  process  actors  had  to  decide  when  to  talk,  with 
whom  to  interact  and  what  to  wait  for—the  puzzle  of  setting  up  the 
Roadmap. However, these decisions came with structural constraints and 
a logical sequence. The steering of the Gender Equality Unit faced differ-
ent choices at certain points in the process. There were unintended conse-
quences and no possibility to go back to change a decision. For example, 
the  initiative  for  the  whole  process  had  to  be  started  by  the  Gender 
Equality Unit of DG Employment. They were the lead DG for gender 
equality policy in the Commission and therefore had the power to decide 
who participates, when and how—a fact that was acknowledged by several 
interviewees from other DGs and actors:

Well, surely DG Employment was in the driving seat. (Commission official 7:136)

Let’s say that we started from a privileged position because we had all structures 
in place (…) And there was a lot of work. And we did it in this case with the 
interservice group multilaterally, then a lot of work bilaterally, especially with 
some DGs, so I would say that there were informal contacts that were really 
important. (Commission official 6:273)

The Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment was able to decide how 
to organise the policy process and it was their decision to start with a top- 
level meeting of officials from the DGs. The Unit responsible acted strate-
gically by turning the rules of procedure into an opportunity to involve all 
DGs. While DGs usually tend to limit the influence of competing DGs 
(Hartlapp et al. 2013), DG Employment used the rules as a tool to share 
responsibility  and  remind  reluctant  DGs  of  their  gender  mainstreaming 
duty. They could have started differently, e.g. by presenting drafts or talk-
ing to those who regularly participated in the interservice group on gender 
equality. However, those responsible were aware that the gender equality 
policy programme would generate a strong commitment if the top-level 
supported it and felt responsible. Those coordinating the drafting of the 
Roadmap were extraordinarily aware of this fact, even stressing that they 
knew that they had no power to impose anything to the other DGs:

Q: … It was left to every Directorate General what measures they want to take.
A: Of course. Because this is the point. That you cannot really impose things to 
be  done.  (…)  I  think,  also  the  fact  of  having  this  done  at  the  Directorate 
General level was very good, because then you are pushed to produce something 

144 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

and  to  come  up  with  ideas  and  activities,  so  I  think  it  was  a  good  process. 
(Commission official 6:75–76)

At the same time, the Gender Equality Unit took into account that the 
strategy gender mainstreaming suggested that it is absolutely necessary to 
gain support from the top level and that gender equality policy is therefore 
reliant  on  a  top-down  process  (Stiegler  2000;  Ahrens  2005).  Such  top- 
down support was obviously the exception and not the norm in the EU 
Commission, because ‘no one had the authority to compel Commissioners to 
take gender issues seriously, if they were not so inclined’ (Hoskyns 2008: 114).
The Gender Equality Unit was also aware that they could have taken a 
different approach in the involvement of external actors. They were aware 
that  they  needed  the  support  of  the  interinstitutional  groups  and  the 
European Parliament to get a positive feedback on the Roadmap. Civil 
society had to see that their views were taken into account, although they 
did not need an active role (even though they had one in the Advisory 
Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men).

The wrong ownership might have provoked the interpretation of the 
Roadmap  drafting  process  as  a  modified  standard  process,  whereby  the 
interviewees stated their expectations of the Gender Equality Unit with-
out checking whether stakeholders were actually involved. They believed 
that the Gender Equality Unit would naturally involve stakeholders in the 
drafting  process,  as  was  usually  the  case.  The  wrong  ownership  can  be 
explained  by  a  combination  of  three  distinct,  yet  overlapping  factors: 
bounded knowledgeability, trust and ‘othering’.

Some interviewees did not possess detailed information about how the 
Gender Equality Unit set up the drafting process in the Roadmap case. They 
just transferred their knowledge from previous experiences in an example of 
bounded knowledgeability. This boundedness can also be seen as a sign of 
trust; trust that the Gender Equality Unit would involve stakeholders any-
way. By signalling that only the Gender Equality Unit was responsible for 
involving stakeholders, interviewees also avoided feeling responsible them-
selves—a behaviour that can best be described as ‘othering’.

3.2.5 

  The Role of the European Women’s Lobby and  

the ‘Closed Door’

The key element of the EWL was its excellent network and active involve-
ment of as many actors as possible from outside the Commission to lobby 

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  145

the Commission—through the ‘gender lunches’ for example. They got in 
touch with many NGOs which were working in this specific policy area 
with  different  MEPs  and  Social  Partners.  The  only  crucial  point  they 
missed was to lobby every single Commission DG involved in the drafting 
of the Roadmap.

The EWL failed to contact other DGs because they had only limited 
knowledge of the working procedures in the Commission. From their 
lobbying experience they knew their position vis-à-vis the Commission. 
They were aware of the necessity to lobby early in the policy process in 
order  to  influence  Commission  proposals  because  access  would  be 
more constrained at a later stage. However, they did not realise that 
the Roadmap was not only drafted by DG Employment. Why the EWL 
did not choose to ‘act otherwise’ is due to their practical consciousness 
which  guided  them  in  the  policy  process.  They  followed  the  institu-
tional order without questioning and stuck to the usual actions. We can 
understand  the  EWL’s  actions  and  compliance  with  the  institutional 
order when we consider their everyday interactions with Commission 
officials:

 1.  The EWL deemed it sufficient to lobby DG Employment because they 
were the lead DG for gender equality during that period and respon-
sible for the policy area. While DG Employment decided to invite the 
other DGs to draft their parts, the EWL would have lacked the power 
to force them to accept drafts from DG Employment anyway.

 2.  The Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and 
Men was the only space where the EWL met the Commission offi-
cials on a formal basis. Here DG Employment was the sole DG to 
participate  and  the  EWL  may  have  had  the  impression  that  DG 
Employment was the only DG responsible for drafting.

The fact that the co-ordination of the consultation with civil society—the 
authoritative  resources  to  command  actors  (Giddens  1984)—was  in  the 
hands of DG Employment was another factor in the limited scope of the 
EWL. DG Employment ‘closed the door’ to the internal process and thereby 
limited access for NGOs. Limiting consultation with civil society did not 
occur by accident; it was a decision by the Gender Equality Unit. The deci-
sion can only be understood against the background of the whole drafting 
process. They wanted an internal document, a working programme and not 
a focused exchange or negotiations with gender equality specialists.

146 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

The  European  Women’s  Lobby  had  the  idea  of  using  the  Gender 
Equality Unit as an entry point to the internal process, but they faced the 
authoritative resources of the Gender Equality Unit and did not succeed:

We have also been asking [the Gender Equality Unit] whether we could come 
and just present ourselves. And it’s not a question of spying or looking at what 
people do, it’s also meeting the people who work on different areas so that we can, 
if necessary, support them. But it wasn’t possible. (NGO representative 29:44)

As this access strategy failed the EWL aimed to influence ‘everybody’:

A: We were asking them all the time, in every speech, in every meeting: Where 
are you with the new strategy?
Q: And who did you contact?
A: Everybody. Well, at different levels, writing to the Commissioners, or when 
we met someone of the Gender Equality Unit or in the Advisory Committee or 
so. (NGO representative 29:108–110)

In the end, the EWL’s decision to contact commissioners did not prove 
to be helpful, as there was a clear division between the political and work-
ing level of the DGs and because lobbying activities towards commission-
ers  could  not  simply  trickle  down  to  the  civil  servants  who  drafted  the 
Roadmap in the various DGs:

You know … the difference between the ministry … or in our case the DG and 
the cabinet. The cabinet belongs to the political leader [the commissioner]. (…) 
Because  unfortunately  the  two  [DG  and  cabinet]  are  not  always  in  perfect 
harmony. And here it’s worse in the sense that even geographically the cabinet is 
not in this building, they are in Berlaymont. We hardly see those people. I don’t 
know the faces, I know the names. We have very strict rules, you cannot call 
them; they sometimes call you, but we don’t like it and then we complain that 
you should go through the normal hierarchy. Because of course bosses don’t like 
it if a cabinet member calls me because she or he needs something urgently on 
gender  and  she  knows  that  she  doesn’t  have  time  to  go  through  everyone. 
(Commission official 1:142)

The fact that the cabinet of a DG is solely political provided a chal-
lenge  to  the  working  routines  of  the  Commission.  Cabinet  members 
come and go with the Commissioner; they are rarely connected to the 
working level, the civil servants. The cabinets are often led by people who 
do not know who is working in the DGs as civil servants. The director  

3.2  DRAFTING THE ROADMAP: A USUAL, MODIFIED OR DEVIANT PROCESS? 

  147

generals lead the DGs and they are not necessarily members of a cabinet. 
The divisions are even spatial: all cabinets are in the Berlaymont building, 
while the civil servants of DGs are in other buildings. There are also strict 
rules for both sides in relation to who is allowed to contact whom, e.g. 
the cabinet is not allowed to contact the working level and vice versa. 
Imagine someone working in the office of a national minister not being 
allowed to contact a civil servant in the same ministry. Even if people at 
the top were lobbied successfully by the EWL, they do not necessarily get 
through to those who are working on the subject. They might be stopped 
halfway because someone in the middle does not share the opinion that 
something should be done. This might also be the reason why there were 
such few contacts between the EP and the Commission and why the EP 
was ‘not allowed’ to talk directly to the working level. MEPs talk to the 
Commissioner and their cabinet and those are seldom well-connected to 
the working level.

The EWL’s only chance to exert a direct influence would have been to 
contact other civil servants who were responsible for gender equality in 
the Commission. However, the EWL failed to contact the civil servants on 
the  same  level  as  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG  Employment. 
Admittedly, this was probably not an easy task as those responsible, espe-
cially the Gender Equality Unit, refused access to the central interservice 
group on gender equality. However, some Commission officials expressed 
their displeasure of not being lobbied:

A: This is very important because this is political activism, which I do not see 
much of. Because in my work I have not yet been paid a visit by the European 
Women’s Lobby … would you believe that?
Q: They haven’t …?
A: No, they didn’t try to see me at all … ever. In my 4–5 years on the job.
Q: So, you’ve been here for 4 or 5 years now and they never …?
A: And it’s not my job to say: ‘Hey, don’t you have anything to say?’ Toc, toc, toc. 
Whereas I have been lobbied by the [topic] people … even though I don’t have 
much more to say than what I said to them, you know, last year. But … they 
invite  me  to  conferences,  you  know,  and  try  to  put  something  together. 
(Commission official 25:88)

We must put this quote in the right context. The interviewee explained 
that s/he can only enforce gender equality projects if s/he can provide 
prima facie evidence to his/her boss that there is pressure from stakehold-
ers and the requirement to react to lobby groups.

148 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

We can compare the quotation above with the one by the EWL, as they 

talked about exactly the same DG.3

I mean DG [name], they are not very open. Really … it’s also a question of 
competence, because when it comes to [policy area] what would need to be done 
would be to look at the material and there is no European competence, it’s true. 
But also not much awareness in some cases. (NGO representative 29:64)

Although the EWL faced a ‘closed door’ in the Commission, the question 
remained as to why other NGOs did not try to lobby DGs in their policy 
area. The answer lies in the role that other NGOs attributed to the EWL as 
the main and most important stakeholder. The activities of the European 
Women’s Lobby were highly valued and appreciated by other NGOs:

I do remember that the European Women’s Lobby put in place a very strong 
and detailed response regarding the Roadmap. And what should be included 
and what should be highlighted, etc. This is going back a bit. And then when 
they launched the Roadmap, they did invite [NGO name] to speak about the 
[topic] bit and so a member of our gender working group did speak … but 
again, it brought across the message that we deal with human rights … our 
message is always the same. (NGO representative 18:50)

This quotation suggests that other NGOs developed their own chan-
nels  of  interaction  with  DGs  other  than  DG  Employment  over  time. 
Surprisingly, they did not use them for the Roadmap. They instead counted 
on the EWL to carry out the necessary lobbying activities. The activities of 
the EWL even functioned as a justification to explain why other NGOs 
were not lobbying:

At  that  point  there  was  some  cooperation  going  on  between  the  European 
Women’s Lobby and [NGO name] on [topic], basically. So there were already 
some discussions. But [NGO name] … there was a position from our side (…) 
There wasn’t any further action than this. We were represented for sure. (…) we 
participated with our positions, but we did not do some lobbying ourselves for 
the Roadmap. (NGO representative 16:62)

NGOs thought it was sufficient to insert their ideas into the shadow 
Roadmap  and  to  have  the  lobbying  process  organised  by  the  EWL.  As 
they did not participate in lobbying activities themselves, they probably 
never realised that the EWL faced difficulties in accessing DGs which some 
other NGOs were already in touch with.

3.3  THE EP AND MEMBER STATES REACT TO THE ADOPTED ROADMAP 

  149

In summary, the drafting process was the most important period and 
the role of the Gender Equality Unit and the EWL were crucial. The next 
section explains how the FEMM committee drove the EP process, while 
the member states struggled to position themselves within the adopted 
communication.

3.3 

  the eP and member states reaCt 

to the adoPted roadmaP

Due to the formal split of responsibilities between the Commission, the EP 
and the Council, the question of who is considered in charge of EU gender 
equality policy implicitly steered the actors’ interpretations. It may not come 
as a surprise that here the interpretations are split more along institutional 
lines. While the Commission wanted to make clear that—even though the 
Roadmap was their ‘baby’—it should only be one part of the gender equality 
policy picture. Their interpretation was ‘we have done our job, we are through, 
now it’s the turn of the others’. When looking at the crucial role of the Gender 
Equality Unit, this attitude becomes obvious in their routines. Although the 
other two main EU institutions—the Council and EP—acknowledged the 
Commission’s emphasis on shared competencies, they missed the opportunity 
to further discuss the Roadmap’s implications for their institutions. A critical 
assessment of the power of the EP and the member states in EU gender equal-
ity policy- making revealed insecurities with how to handle the changed legal 
format of the Roadmap as a policy programme.

In the EP, the Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality 
struggled  to  reach  a  compromise  in  its  resolution  on  the  Roadmap. 
Commissioner Špidla played a de-politicising role in this. The Advisory 
Committee  on  Equal  Opportunities  was  crucial  in  reconciling  the 
Commission’s position with those of member states. However, the prob-
lem was that when the EU did not assign a specific budget via an action 
programme for gender equality, the civil servants in the member states had 
nothing left to implement in their countries. Gender equality depended 
on the arbitrary existence of people who were gender conscious in the cor-
rect position in their national ministry.

3.3.1 

  Struggling with Compromise in the EP

NGO representatives judged the EP resolution’s impact on the Roadmap 
critically. The resolution did not influence the Roadmap because the EP 

150 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

could not change the Commission communication. NGO representatives 
especially regretted the limited impact:

Parliament was not involved before. They were involved afterwards. Which is 
fine, but it’s not extremely useful. And we had a meeting with the rapporteur, 
so we participated in the Parliament’s report on the Roadmap. But that [the 
resolution] does not have an impact. (NGO representative 29:94)

Due to this factual limitation the process was seen as surprisingly impor-
tant  by  Commission  officials,  where  specific  details  of  the  process  were 
subject to discussion:

Let’s say that the dialogue with the Parliament has in a way stressed some of the 
concerns that people had. And so it reinforced even more our commitment and 
the willingness to do better in a way. So I think it was a very complementary 
process. (Commission official 6:56)

First,  the  Commission  official  interpreted  the  process  as  a  dialogue, 
even though there was only a mini-hearing and meeting of Commissioner 
Špidla with FEMM members. Second, it was not the whole Parliament, 
but the FEMM committee which was in charge of the Commission com-
munication; a fact that is often hidden in the narratives of interviewees (cf. 
quote above from NGO representative). However, the way in which the 
EP and the FEMM committee emphasised the importance of the Roadmap 
by adopting a resolution and involving committees added symbolic power 
to how gender equality policy actors inside the Commission approached 
the implementation. The importance that an EP official placed on the EP 
resolution can also be seen in the following quote:

For the Roadmap, for example, we had the Committee of the Regions, the Social 
and Economic Committee, we had invited ETUC, Business Europe … I mean 
all were invited … all were invited (…). (EP official 23:56)

The mini-hearing in the EP was described as if the FEMM committee 
had  invited  all  gender  equality  policy  stakeholders.  In  fact,  only  a  few 
experts had been invited. According to the official record only civil ser-
vants from the Commission, the EESC and one member state representa-
tive attended the hearing.4 It is true that the FEMM invited all the actors 
mentioned above to various hearings in the committee on a regular basis, 
however, they were not invited to the hearing on the Roadmap. Therefore, 

3.3  THE EP AND MEMBER STATES REACT TO THE ADOPTED ROADMAP 

  151

the way in which the EP official listed the institutions shows how much 
was expected from the Roadmap and how important it was to the FEMM 
committee overall. If the Roadmap had not been important, s/he would 
have  barely  remembered  the  meeting.  Listing  all  the  institutions  also 
meant framing the Roadmap as an important item and expressing the high 
expectations which were connected to the Roadmap.

What  is  even  more  striking  is  that  the  Social  Partners  (ETUC, 
BusinessEurope) were mentioned, while the European Women’s Lobby 
was not. From the other descriptions, we know that the EWL was involved 
in the EP process (although not in the mini-hearing), yet there were no 
accounts of any contacts between MEPs and the Social Partners. Neither 
the MEPs nor the representatives of the trade union or employer’s organ-
isations mentioned any contact, whereas both contacted the EWL.

Surprisingly,  no  interviewee  mentioned  the  other  high-level  meeting 
that took place parallel to the Roadmap’s publication; the ‘exchange of 
views  with  VIPs’  with  thirteen  different  Commissioners  and  the 
Commission president on 8th March 2006.

Narratives from parliamentary participants revealed that the EP process 
was  not  free  from  tensions,  neither  regarding  the  relationship  with  the 
Commission nor concerning the relationship inside the Women’s Rights 
and  Gender  Equality  Committee.  A  kind  of  silent  agreement  existed 
between the actors who participated in the policy process not to put too 
much conflict into the process by avoiding interference with the internal 
processes of other institutions. An EP civil servant explained the accep-
tance of conflicts inside the FEMM committee and a higher workload by 
the significance that FEMM members assigned to gender equality policy5:

This is hard to say. In the sense … I know the answer, but I don’t know how to 
put  it.  It’s  very  difficult,  since  the  FEMM  is  a  Committee  that  is  an  extra 
Committee to get people involved in the work. Of course the only reason why 
Mrs. [Name] would be a coordinator and bother with all these extra meetings 
and all this fight among new members would be to take at least a couple of 
important dossiers throughout the legislative term. (EP official 23:182)

The decision to invite several other committees to give an opinion was a 
strategic decision. The FEMM members and the rapporteur used the same 
approach as the civil servants from the Commission. They wanted to imple-
ment gender mainstreaming and open up the standard parliamentary pro-
cedure by ensuring that large numbers of other committees were appointed.

152 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

In regard to the relationship with the Commission the Roadmap pro-
cess  was  somewhat  atypical  of  normal  procedures  between  the 
Commissioner and the EP. Shortly before the committee voting on the 
Roadmap,  the  Commissioner  held  bilateral  meetings  of  one  hour  with 
representatives  of  the  political  parties  to  gain  support.  While  the 
Commissioner normally has multilateral meetings with representatives of 
the FEMM committee (usually the chair and vice-chairs), the Roadmap 
voting was preceded by unusual bilateral meetings. An EP official inter-
preted the bilateral meetings as a strategic move of the Commissioner:

The Commissioner … saw them in one week. (…) One hour each. So, what he 
would do is … present the Roadmap: ‘Yes, these are my priorities. I would like to 
have your support in this and that and then another one would have number x’. 
The support was cleverly asking for the support based on the personal interest of 
each member. It’s normal, it’s political practice. It’s nothing special. It always 
looks ugly when we start to explain it. Then you say: ‘It’s politics’. And it’s easy. 
But that’s how he did the strategy, also to gather support. (EP official 23:194)

The justification provided by the EP official—‘it’s politics’—was mir-
rored to some extent in the interpretations of Commission officials who 
spoke  about  the  bilateral  meetings  although  they  didn’t  see  them  as  a 
deviation from routines:

It’s not like that we had an exchange with them [the FEMM], but we had an 
analysis of all the most important documents, (…) and the Commissioner had 
himself a lot of bilateral [meetings] with the members of the Women’s Committee 
of the Parliament. (Commission official 6:180)

The Commissioner knew a great deal about the internal workings of 
the EP. He put a large emphasis on reaching consensus, trade-offs and 
negotiating different positions. When he gained support from every single 
MEP  for  one  selected  part  of  the  Roadmap,  no  political  group  would 
reject another part of the Roadmap, as long as it was accepted by the other 
groups;  otherwise  the  political  group  would  have  faced  other  conflicts 
from the Roadmap parts that they supported.

Therefore,  the  entire  process  was  highly  de-politicised.  The  FEMM 
committee was defeated. By asking each representative to support the spe-
cific  part  of  the  Roadmap  which  was  selected  for  her/him,  the  MEPs 
decided to support their political preferences. Supporting selective parts 
prevented  an  open  discussion  about  the  Roadmap  as  a  gender  equality 

3.3  THE EP AND MEMBER STATES REACT TO THE ADOPTED ROADMAP 

  153

policy  programme  in  general  and  averted  a  publicly  visible  controversy 
about  its  changed  character.  Without  this  strategic  move  the  Roadmap 
might have faced a similar destiny as the discussions about the European 
Institute on Gender Equality that released rebellion and conflict, not only 
in the EP (Ahrens and Lewalter 2006). Talking to MEPs individually con-
firmed the idea that the Commission took their political preferences and 
views  into  account.  In  summary,  the  Commissioner  managed  to  assure 
support from the whole Committee:

We have a very cautious Commissioner. Very cautious in his way of working. 
And  in  the  definition  of  Roadmap  …  nothing.  They  can  always  say  in  the 
Commission that they have taken into account the priorities set by the Committee 
in  the  past  years  and  the  request  and  they  followed  the  advice.  (EP   
official 23:152)

Although Commission officials never consulted FEMM members, this 
informal  procedure  used  to  claim  that  the  concerns  of  the  FEMM 
Committee were taken seriously. The strategy was successful, yet resulted 
also in disappointment, as the following quotes show:

So what is left to DG Employment except a Roadmap that does not harm any-
one. I am sorry to destroy your optimism. (EP official 23:98)

Unfortunately it happened that this Roadmap was … in the equal opportunity 
commission  [the  FEMM  committee],  we  wanted  to  improve  this  Roadmap, 
because it was not bad, but it was pretty vague and particularly with the issues 
regarding women. (MEP 10:2)

European institutions, such as the Committee of the Regions and the 
European Social and Economic Committee, were acknowledged as formal 
participants in the policy process who had to be invited to hearings, etc. 
The FEMM committee had not considered them as relevant partners in 
the discussions of the Roadmap. The same applies to the member states 
and NGOs (with the exception of the EWL). They were never mentioned 
as a contact by the MEPs for the time prior to the adoption, although 
MEPs were aware of different national views, e.g. on parental leave for 
fathers (Interviews 2 and 3). The picture slightly changed for the period 
after adoption, when some MEPs mentioned exchange with national insti-
tutions, political parties or women’s movements in terms of the Roadmap’s 
content (Interviews 10 and 24).

154 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

Surprisingly, the FEMM committee did not try to contact DGs other 
than DG Employment on particular topics. With gender mainstreaming in 
mind, other DGs involved in the Roadmap, such as DG Development or 
DG Research, could have also been targeted to lobby for specific provi-
sions in the policy area. Therefore, it is pivotal to observe that every single 
actor outside the Commission failed to properly establish gender main-
streaming  in  their  work.  Otherwise  it  is  impossible  to  understand  why 
everything concentrated on DG Employment.

The  FEMM  clearly  accepted  the  exceptionally  dominant  role  of  the 
Commission for the Roadmap and no MEP questioned the Roadmap as 
the Commission’s ‘baby’.

3.3.2 

  The Bounded Member States

For Commission officials the Advisory Committee fulfilled a specific role, 
although it was perceived as an informal one:

Because you see, in the Commission, when you say formal, this is something that 
in a way you are forced to do. In this respect also the Advisory Committee … we 
asked them to have an opinion, but we’re not forced to [do that]. (Commission 
official 6:167)

The Advisory Committee was the hub to reconcile the Commission’s 
position with member states and with aligning activities. It functioned as 
a safeguard for the Commission’s presentation in the Council, so that no 
one would be surprised when they pointed to the member states as ‘really 
responsible’  for  implementing  the  Roadmap.  Nevertheless,  the  civil 
 servants in the member states were not ready to implement anything in 
their countries as there was no supranational budget available via an action 
programme for gender equality. This was due to the fact that—just as at 
the Commission level—PROGRESS was not dealt with by those in charge 
of  gender  equality,  but  rather  by  those  who  were  responsible  for  such 
social  action  programmes.  Therefore,  whether  or  not  gender  equality 
played a role in PROGRESS depended on the national collaboration in 
ministries—whether  ‘gender  equality  people’  could  push  ‘mainstream 
people’ to implement gender mainstreaming. While this is a speculative 
interpretation, it can be backed up with another example from a member 
state representative. S/he described how s/he sneaked into meetings of 
colleagues on employment policy—despite the limited seats—in order to 

3.4  CONCLUSION 

  155

secure gender mainstreaming and lobbying for gender equality (Interview 
26). Without such accidental existence of gender aware civil servants at 
certain positions in national ministries, supranational gender equality pol-
icy often did not make it to the national agenda.

As an unintended consequence of the Roadmap’s changed character, 
member  states’  representatives  from  the  Advisory  Committee  and  the 
High Level Group on Gender Mainstreaming lost some of their control 
over EU gender equality by losing the previous action programme and 
its budget. From then on they had to accept a long administrative path 
for financing transnational gender equality projects in the member states. 
This was a detour from the Gender Equality Unit to the DG Employment 
Unit  responsible  for  PROGRESS  to  the  national  (employment)  unit 
responsible  for  PROGRESS  and  finally  back  to  the  national  Gender 
Equality Unit.

One explanation for the developments and changes is that all individual 
actors were always bounded in their own institutions and judged other 
actors according to their own standards. For example, the Council repre-
sentative  assumed  that  the  Commission  followed  a  certain  procedure, 
which was correct and similar to the one expected because the procedure 
for their own institution was correct.

3.4 

  ConClusion

Policy processes do not simply follow formal or informal rules and rou-
tines and a given path. Their operations are shaped by the interpretations 
of actors. In this chapter we examined various periods of the Roadmap 
policy process and assessed the different interpretations and the way actors 
assigned meaning. Actors may well form networks, epistemic communities 
or velvet triangles, yet whether they collaborate or compete is not only 
driven by different policy goals, but also by their different knowledgeabil-
ity and their expectation from other actors.

During  the  initial  set  up  of  the  Commission  communication  on  the 
Roadmap the majority of those who participated later in the overall draft-
ing  process  did  not  engage  much  in  policy-making.  A  small  circle  of 
Commission civil servants and members of interinstitutional groups devel-
oped opposite interpretations to the engaged actors from NGOs and the 
FEMM committee. While those from inside the Commission were confi-
dent that a new gender equality strategy was never in question, the other 
side was obviously uncertain.

156 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

These opposing perspectives affected the following policy-making peri-
ods. The initial divide continued and resulted in the dissolution of long- 
term policy network ties that changed the previous rules and routines of 
collaborative gender equality policy-making. The political leaders played 
an important role during the initial period, but they lost influence during 
the remaining policy process.

Actors’  interpretations  of  the  drafting  phase  of  the  Roadmap  are 
instructive with regard to the making of EU gender equality policy- making 
and the actor’s constellations. During the drafting period actors decided 
which content to include and how to assign responsibility for advancing 
the  Roadmap.  They  developed  strategies  to  make  soft  law  accountable 
despite its ‘softness’. The drafting process also brought to light the rules 
and routines that actors expected, which in turn provided the background 
for their own activities and expectations.

Not surprisingly, the drafting process was mostly interpreted as either 
an uneventful routine or as fundamentally divisive. The respective inter-
pretations were rooted in the actors’ experiences of policy-making and 
their expectations about formal and informal paths. During this period 
the role of the Gender Equality Unit and the EWL were crucial. The 
Gender  Equality  Unit  shouldered  the  responsibility  of  delivering  the 
Roadmap on time. This put it in the position of ‘wrong ownership’. It 
was perceived as solely responsible for the Roadmap, even though their 
aim was to share this responsibility within the Commission. The process 
which  was  led  by  DG  Employment  remained  almost  uncontested. 
Disagreements on specific procedural and content-related decisions were 
suppressed for the sake of finalising the Roadmap communication. The 
EWL had to carry the burden as a major hub for non-Commission activi-
ties and also shouldered the responsibility of lobbying the Commission 
in the name of civil society. The EWL was stopped halfway by lacking 
opportunities  to  lobby  DGs  other  than  DG  Employment.  Despite  its 
excellent  networks  civil  society  missed  the  opportunity  to  press  more 
efficiently  for  a  different  Roadmap  and  to  establish  new  channels  of 
influence other than DG Employment.

The  FEMM  committee  and  the  member  states  replaced  the  Gender 
Equality Unit and the EWL as the most important actors during the third 
period, in the aftermath of the adoption. The FEMM committee faced 
difficulties in finding a compromise for a common position that would not 
cause  publicly  visible  conflicts.  This  also  led  to  the  FEMM  committee 
sticking to the formal procedures and thus contributing to de-politicising 

  NOTES 

  157

the Roadmap. The member states found themselves caught between an 
EU policy programme that had no direct impact on their national level 
and a national level that was not prepared to deliver the same policy pro-
gramme as during the framework strategy period.

Different  structural  constraints  influenced  the  actors’  interpreta-
tions and reconstructions of the gender equality policy-making process 
and sometimes revealed even opposite interpretations and narratives. 
Actors were predominantly aware of their own working environment, 
but lacked an understanding of the other spheres of EU policy-making. 
The Gender Equality Unit decided to put the Roadmap as a communi-
cation under strict Commission rules. This move was highly strategic 
and reflected a way of getting the Roadmap adopted without resistance 
from  inside  or  outside  the  Commission.  The  decision  to  set  up  the 
Roadmap as a Commission communication reduced the potential for 
activities, e.g. actions that had to be negotiated with member states, 
Social Partners or other stakeholders. Superordinate formal and infor-
mal EU policy-making rules in combination with gender mainstream-
ing  changed  the  form  in  which  actors  collaborated  in  EU  gender 
equality policy. To this end, the Roadmap process led to institutional 
conversion  (Thelen  2004)  by  allowing  the  Gender  Equality  Unit  to 
change crucial elements of the previous institutional framework of pol-
icy programmes.

notes

 
 1.  Cf. Commission staff working document—Annex to the Communication 
from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
European  Economic  and  Social  committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions—A Roadmap for equality between women and men 2006–2010—
Impact assessment {COM(2006) 92 final} /SEC/2006/0275/.

 2.  The Secretariat General is the President’s department, at the service of the 
President, the College and the Commission departments; a central service of 
the European Commission. One of the main tasks is managing the decision-
making process in the Commissioners’ College.

 3.  For privacy reasons the name of the DG is not revealed here.
 4.  Cf. Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality. Statistics on main 
activities during the sixth legislative period (2004–2009) version October 
17, 2007.

 5.  For more details on the FEMM committee and power play in the EP please 

cf. Ahrens (2016).

158 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

reFerenCes

Ahrens, Petra. 2005. Top-Down-Umsetzung von Gender Mainstreaming. Berlin: 
GenderKompetenzZentrum.  Accessed  October  1,  2013.  http://www.gen-
derkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/topdown.pdf.

———. 2016. The Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality – Taking 
Advantage of Institutional Power Play. Parliamentary Affairs 69 (4): 778–793. 
doi:10.1093/pa/gsw005.

Ahrens,  Petra,  and  Sandra  Lewalter.  2006.  Das  Europäische  Institut  für 
Gleichstellungsfragen – Was lange währt wird endlich gut? femina politica 2: 
124–127.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 

New York: Routledge.

———. 2005. Die männliche Herrschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Chappell, Louise, and Georgina Waylen. 2013. Gender and the Hidden Life of 

Institutions. Public Administration 91 (3): 599–615.

Connell, Raewyn. 1995. Masculinities. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Council  of  Europe/Group  of  Specialists  on  Mainstreaming.  1999.  Gender 
Mainstreaming. Conceptual Framework, Methodology and Presentation of Good 
Practice. Final report of Activities of the Group of Specialists on Mainstreaming 
(EG-S-MS). Summary. EC (99) 3. Strasbourg.

European  Commission.  2005.  Communication  from  the  Commission  on  the 

Social Agenda. COM(2005) 33 final.

Giddens, Anthony. 1979. Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure, and 

Contradiction in Social Analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. 

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Golub, Jonathan. 2008. The Study of Decision-Making Speed in the European 
Union: Methods, Data and Theory. European Union Politics European Union 
Politics 9 (1): 167–179.

Greenwood,  Justin.  2007.  Interest  representation  in  the  European  Union. 

New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Haas,  Peter  M.  1992.  Introduction:  Epistemic  Communities  and  International 

Policy Coordination. International Organization 46 (1): 1–35.

Hartlapp, Miriam, Julia Metz, and Christian Rauh (2013). Linking Agenda Setting 
to  Coordination  Structures:  Bureaucratic  Politics  Inside  the  European 
Commission. Journal of European Integration 35 (4): 425–441.

Hix, Simon. 2006. The European Union as a Polity (I). In Handbook of European 
Union Politics, ed. Knud Erik Jørgensen, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben Rosamond, 
141–158. London; Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Hooghe, Liesbet. 2005. Several Roads Lead to International Norms, But Few Via 
International  Socialization:  A  Case  Study  of  the  European  Commission. 
International Organization 59 (4): 861–898.

  REFERENCES 

  159

Hoskyns, Catherine. 2008. Governing the EU: Gender and Macroeconomics. In 
Global Governance: Feminist Perspectives, ed. Shirin Rai and Georgina Waylen, 
107–128. Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hubert,  Agnès,  and  Maria  Stratigaki.  2016.  Twenty  Years  of  EU  Gender 

Mainstreaming: Rebirth Out of the Ashes? Femina Politica 25 (2): 21–36.

Jacquot,  Sophie.  2010.  The  Paradox  of  Gender  Mainstreaming:  Unanticipated 
Effects of New Modes of Governance in the Gender Equality Domain. West 
European Politics 33 (1): 118–135.

Kauppi, Niilo. 2011. EU Politics. In Sociology of the European Union, ed. Adrien 

Favell and Virginie Guiraudon, 150–171. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kenny, Meryl. 2007. Gender, Institutions and Power: A Critical Review. Politics 

27 (2): 91–100.

König, Thomas. 2008. Analysing the Process of EU Legislative Decision-Making: 
To Make a Long Story Short. European Union Politics European Union Politics 
9 (1): 145–165.

Lang, Sabine. 2009. Assessing Advocacy: Transnational Women’s Networks and 
Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Union.  Social  Politics  16  (3):  
327–357.

Mackay, Fiona, Meryl Kenny, and Louise Chappell. 2010. New Institutionalism 
Through a Gender Lens: Towards a Feminist Institutionalism? International 
Political Science Review 31 (5): 573–588.

Mahoney,  James.  2000.  Path  Dependence  in  Historical  Sociology.  Theory  and 

Society 29 (4): 507–548.

Mérand,  Frédéric.  2011.  EU  Policies.  In  Sociology  of  the  European  Union,  ed. 
Adrian  Favell  and  Virginie  Guiraudon,  172–192.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 
Macmillan.

Putnam,  Robert.  1988.  Diplomacy  and  Domestic  Politics:  The  Logic  of  Two- 
Level  Games.  International  Organization  42:  427–460.  doi:10.1017/
S0020818300027697.

Schmidt, Verena. 2005. Gender Mainstreaming - an Innovation in Europe? The 
Institutionalisation  of  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Commission. 
Opladen: Barbara Budrich.

Stiegler,  Barbara.  2000.  Wie  Gender  in  den  Mainstream  kommt:  Konzepte, 
Argumente  und  Praxisbeispiele  zur  EU-Strategie  des  Gender-Mainstreaming. 
Bonn: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.

Thelen,  Kathleen.  1999.  Historical  Institutionalism  in  Comparative  Politics. 

Annual Review of Political Science 2: 369–404.

———.  2003.  How  Institutions  Evolve:  Insights  from  Comparative  Historical 
Analysis.  In  Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences,  ed.  James 
Mahoney  and  Dieter  Rueschemeyer,  208–240.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

———. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy of Skills in Germany, 
Britain, the United States, and Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

160 

3  (RE)CONSTRUCTING POLICY-MAKING PROCESSES

Tsebelis, George. 2002. Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press.

Woodward,  Alison  E.  2004.  Building  Velvet  Triangles:  Gender  and  Informal 
Governance.  In  Informal  Governance  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Thomas 
Christiansen, 76–93. Cheltenham: Elgar.

Key doCuments doCumentary researCh

European  Women’s  Lobby:  Gender  Equality  Road  Map  for  the  European 

Community 2006–2010. Brüssel 2005.

CHAPTER 4

Deconstructing Network Voices 
and Governance Characteristics

It often comes down to the people working there and what they feel is 

important.

The whole decision-making structure is a complex thing.

(Interview with NGO representative)

Which institutional processes influence the actors’ chances in shaping poli-
cies in the complex EU policy-making system? In this chapter I will extract 
from the interviews four standard EU policy-making features at a meso- 
level that explain why interpretations vary so widely: (1) formal and infor-
mal  actor  networks;  (2)  routine  job  rotation;  (3)  internal  division  of 
labour; (4) timing and sequencing issues. Formal and informal actor net-
works  change  their  composition  depending  on  the  policy  instrument. 
Differences occur between the actors’ usual roles in gender equality policy 
and their roles in the Roadmap process. The job rotation system in the 
European Commission and other institutions causes personnel fluctuation 
and impacts on how actors judge the Roadmap. The division of labour, 
the location of actors and their working space—whether it is internal or 
external  to  the  Commission—play  a  part  in  this  process.  Timing  and 
sequencing arise as a problem of synchronising ongoing policy processes. 
These are issues that challenge standard gender equality policy processes. 

161

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4_4162 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

This chapter will show which of these features were contested and which 
remained uncontested.

What  are  the  interconnections  of  the  four  features  and  the  everyday 
workings of EU governance? The EU can be considered as network gov-
ernance1 which consists of collaborating and competing public and private 
actors (cf. Abels 2016; Saurugger 2014). In terms of network governance, 
we can analyse how actors arrive at policy decisions in a complex setting 
and  who  has  the  power  to  decide  what  (cf.  Hooghe  and  Marks  2001; 
Piattoni 2010; Stephenson 2013). One core idea of network governance 
and policy networks is that political actors consider problem solving as the 
essence of politics. The setting of policy-making is defined by the existence 
of highly organised sub-systems which consist of non-governmental and 
social actors (Eising and Kohler-Koch 1999: 5). Gender equality policy 
certainly counts as a highly organised sub-system with a broad range of 
governmental  and  non-governmental  actors  (Hoskyns  1996;  Locher 
2007). Woodward (2004) even discovered a supranational gender equality 
policy network that she called ‘velvet triangle’. This evokes associations 
with early research in network governance on ‘iron triangles’.

The inclusion and exclusion of actors in the political mobilisation on 
gender equality colludes with path-dependent routines of policy-making 
in EU network governance. Abels (2016: 104ff) has also highlighted that 
network-focused approaches in multi-level governance (MLG) were suc-
cessfully used for the gendered analysis of EU policies, while Heinelt and 
Knodt (2011, 392) even consider gender equality policy a ‘classical’ type 
of EU MLG.

The  network  governance  perspective  suggests  that  all  policy  pro-
grammes underlie the same logic. However, whether this specific soft law 
is also set up by the very same actors who are usually involved in policy- 
making remains an open question. Do the same actors participate in this 
policy area across time and among institutions? Are NGOs involved in the 
design of policies, as they are often ‘better informed on specific (and often 
very technical) policy issues and policy proposals’ (Mazey and Richardson 
2006: 252)?

In  all  three  approaches—MLG,  network  governance,  policy  net-
works—a crucial characteristic of EU policy-making is the multiplicity of 
voices  which  aim  to  be  heard.  Whose  voices  are  heard,  by  whom  and 
whose voices count? What kinds of power games are played? Policy net-
works  in  the  EU  developed  in  different  ways  and  the  European 
Commission is well known for designing and promoting policy networks 

4  DECONSTRUCTING NETWORK VOICES AND GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS 

  163

in almost all policy areas. Knowledge about networks is therefore crucial 
for a better understanding of the overall policy-making process. It helps 
to explain how policies emerge, how they are framed and processed, why 
they have certain characteristics and how they contribute to the course of 
integration.

In this chapter the notion of network governance and policy networks 
will be substantiated by the variety of institutional processes. These pro-
cesses influence the choices which are available to the participating actors 
throughout time, space and institutions. They also impact on the readiness 
for having their voices heard. The applied Qualitative Network Analysis 
(QNA) shows where and which networks exist in everyday working situa-
tions, whether they are stable and why, what kind of meaning they are 
given by those who are involved in EU gender equality policy-making. 
QNA is founded on the same basic assumptions as Social Network Analysis. 
It  provides  a  fresh  approach  to  gathering  information  about  qualitative 
aspects of policy networks which are not available through Social Network 
Analysis (Hollstein and Straus 2006).

MLG is intrinsically connected with historical institutionalisms account 
of path-dependency. Both processes go together: the features are charac-
teristic  of  multi-level  governance,  as  they  are  also  the  result  of  path- 
dependency. The crucial question is how the two are mutually constitutive 
and change the political game for future policy-making. The fluctuation of 
personnel alone, for instance, could not explain why the Roadmap devel-
oped the way it did. However, together with changes to policy networks 
and the logic of divided competencies, the fluctuation resulted in crucial 
uncertainties in the Roadmap process.

The chapter proceeds as follows: First, I ask if there were differences 
between actors’ usual roles in gender equality policy and their role in the 
Roadmap process. This includes examining the Roadmap role using the 
visualised formal and informal network maps derived from the interviews 
and assessing if they reveal junctures between formal and informal roles in 
the policy process. Second, I claim that varying policy process interpreta-
tions can be further explained by investigating actors along the time span 
they worked in gender equality policy and—in particular—how long they 
participated in the Roadmap process. Third, variations in the acceptance 
of  divided  competencies  between  the  actors  played  a  role  for  different 
interpretations. Finally, the interpretation as a standard drafting process 
for  a  Commission  communication  hid  challenges  due  to  asynchronous 
timing.

164 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

4.1 

  Deviating in/formal Policy networks: 

stanDarD genDer equality Policy actors comPareD 

to roaDmaP actors

A crucial characteristic of network governance in general and the EU in 
particular is the co-existence and interdependence of formal and informal 
networks. There is extensive literature on formal and informal2 EU policy 
networks (Klüver 2014; Mahoney 2007, 2008; Beyers et al. 2008). Most 
of the research hypotheses centre on transformation (i.e. their contribu-
tion to societal change, organisational deepening, creation of knowledge, 
network society) or problem solving (i.e. delivery of new and better prob-
lem solving and co-ordination) (Straßheim 2011). In addition, scholars 
use Social Network Analysis (SNA) as a key technique to investigate quan-
titatively  complex  networks  among  various  actors,  be  they  individuals, 
small groups or even international organisations (cf. e.g. Carrington et al. 
2005; Christiansen and Piattoni 2004; Jansen 2006; Scott and Carrington 
2011; Wassermann and Faust 1994).

Although considerable research has been devoted to the analysis of the 
emergence, establishment, aim and influence of EU policy networks, we 
do  not  know  much  about  how  civil  servants  perceive  their  ties  in  their 
everyday  working  life.  What  is  often  missing  in  SNA  is  a  possibility  to 
investigate  content,  meaning  and  reasons  for  interaction  in  policy  net-
works  (Crossley  2010).  Consequently,  understanding  the  relationship 
between agency and structure—in the EU context: the process of policy- 
making  through  networks—requires  the  inclusion  of  the  social  world, 
meaning  and  individuals  in  the  research  process  (Crossley  2010;  Fuhse 
and Mützel 2011). Policy networks are also social networks and thereby 
an interactive ‘social world’ which encompasses shared meaning, knowl-
edge, norms, identities, etc, as well as the distribution of resources (Hall 
1987; Strauss 1973).

Research on social movements, policy networks and advocacy coalitions 
have  proven  pivotal  in  understanding  how  interest  representation  has 
worked in the EU. It particularly highlighted the role that civil society 
played in the formulation of EU gender equality policy at a supranational 
and national level. Network analysis on gender equality policy has often 
taken the form of qualitative analysis on the involvement of transnational 
social  movements  or  interest  groups  in  policy-making  (Lang  2009; 
Prudovska and Ferree 2004; Ruzza 2004; Woodward 2004), on the emer-
gence  of  networks  initiated  by  the  European  Commission  (Bretherton 

4.1  DEVIATING IN/FORMAL POLICY NETWORKS 

  165

and Sperling 1996; Mazey 1995; Montoya 2008, 2009) or how networks 
cooperate on different policy issues (Locher 2007; Zippel 2004).

Using process tracing, Keck and Sikkink (1998) have described in detail 
the  emergence  and  establishment  of  Transnational  Advocacy  Networks 
(TAN) around policies of ‘Combating Violence against Women’ and human 
trafficking. They have described how they work, how and why they emerge 
and when they are successful. The analysis of these TAN helps us to under-
stand the role of principled ideas, windows of opportunities and interna-
tional ties between civil society, states and international organisations. Keck 
and  Sikkink’s  influential  methodological  contribution  is  the  ‘boomerang 
pattern’ and its importance in how movements can influence domestic pol-
icy debates. They have shown that TAN pick their strategies according to 
the political opportunity structure and—if domestic channels are blocked—
collaborate with international organisations to set up global norms which 
are transferable to national levels. While this pattern of change is verified for 
the topic of ‘Combating Violence against Women’, there is similar evidence 
of national policy changes through networking of transnational movements 
with  international  organisations  for  gender  mainstreaming  and  human 
rights questions in general (True and Mintrom 2001). Nevertheless, the 
concept of TAN by definition excludes the direct and transcending collabo-
ration of individuals from inside the domestic political system as individual 
actors within a TAN. This distinction has proven useful for studying nation 
states, but applying it to the EU is challenged by the sheer complexity of EU 
politics within the EU system of multi-level governance. The ever changing 
nature of the EU produces important challenges to the concept, as well as 
to the actors themselves. While the EU functioned for a long time as an ally 
for  TAN,  like  other  international  organisations,  the  EU  itself  became  an 
arena of lobbying with every treaty revision which added new competencies 
to the EU level. Hence, the changing nature and scope of EU policies influ-
ence the channels of collaboration which are available between TAN and 
EU institutions (Tarrow 2005).

Therefore, it becomes equally important to distinguish policy networks 
on other grounds, such as their formal and informal ties. This is necessary 
in order to estimate possible ways of influencing EU gender equality  policy. 
Montoya (2008, 2009) has reported in detail how policy networks evolved 
in a certain policy domain (violence against women) which was supported 
by the EU policy programme DAPHNE. Although Montoya used net-
work analysis to measure how ties among network members developed, 
how  they  were  established  and  multiplied  over  time,  the  formal  and 

166 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

 informal cooperation within the network or influences on the EU policy 
process  was  omitted.  From  Lang’s  (2009)  network  analysis  of  transna-
tional women’s movements we learn a lot about links between different 
national women’s movements and essential details about the central role of 
the European Women’s Lobby.

SNA and other EU policy network research tend to use a macro per-
spective which focuses on organisations as actors. I am, however, convinced 
that  the  individuals’  perspective  on  their  kind  of  relationships  includes 
explanations  for  the  way  they  act.  It  makes  a  difference  if  you  perceive 
someone as belonging to a formal policy network, a social movement or an 
advocacy coalition. It makes an even bigger difference where you situate 
yourself in this regard and it also influences the overall policy process.

I argue that taking a micro perspective on policy actors provides infor-
mation and implicit explanations about the way the policy process devel-
ops  and  also  the  way  policy  goals  are  defined.  If  individuals  of  gender 
equality policy, for example, perceive their policy area as opposed to other 
policy  areas  (like  trade,  external  relations,  etc)  and  everyone  in  gender 
equality is seen as a possible ally, people act differently compared to a situ-
ation where they are in competition with others within their policy area. 
The question is: what dominates the everyday work of individuals as policy 
actors? One interpretation of the situation does not necessarily exclude the 
other and there might be other aspects as well, but these two interpreta-
tions are important.

This  leads  to  the  question  of  how  actors  see  their  ties  within  policy- 
making. Do they only include institutional actors or do they also include 
non-governmental, international organisations, individual experts, etc? Who 
do they contact, how often and what does this tell us about policy- making? 
Answering these questions automatically leads to methodological approaches 
specifically designed to investigate networks from a qualitative perspective.

In order to understand the interpretations of the policy process it was 
helpful to investigate the roles that actors usually play in gender equality 
policy and the roles they played in the Roadmap drafting because these 
roles were different. When roles were perceived as unusual we can inter-
pret this as a deviation from routines. However, the roles described in this 
part were more like a revelation of how actors situated themselves in terms 
of the Roadmap and EU gender equality policy in general.

The role that different actors played in EU gender equality policy can 
be derived from the way in which each actor perceived him/herself and 
others in their quotations.

4.1  DEVIATING IN/FORMAL POLICY NETWORKS 

  167

4.1.1 

  EU Gender Equality Policy Actors

Overall,  gender  equality  policy-making  included  significantly  more  actors 
than  those  in  the  process  of  the  Roadmap.  The  general  narratives  about 
actors’ roles provided a pool of actors who were relevant for the interviewees 
in  the  policy-making  process.  Nonetheless,  such  narratives  often  did  not 
include any kind of evaluation in terms of who played a major role in everyday 
routines. Interviewees commented on their contacts regarding closeness/dis-
tance and who was seen as most/least important in the policy process.

Another noticeable feature was the labelling of actors as an institutional 
entity.  Interviewees  often  spoke  of  ‘the  Commission’  (instead  of  the 
Gender Equality Unit or a specific DG), ‘the Parliament’ (instead of the 
Women’s Rights and Gender Equality Committee or any other commit-
tee), ‘NGOs’ (instead of the European Women’s Lobby or another organ-
isation)  and  ‘the  Council’  (instead  of  a  specific  Council  formation  or 
Coreper). Individuals were rarely mentioned; indeed, all descriptions of 
processes were peculiarly impersonal when they concerned an actor out-
side of the home institution.

Overall, the four main actors who had been crucial for the Roadmap 
policy process were often mentioned as the main actors of gender equality 
policy. Therefore, changes to their role, in comparison to gender equality 
policy and the Roadmap process, will be examined in further detail. Other 
actors  who  never  participated  in  the  Roadmap  policy  process  were  also 
seen as important for EU gender equality policy in general. In addition, 
connections  to  women’s  organisations  and  the  national  level  played  a 
more  significant  role  in  EU  gender  equality  policy  (compared  to  the 
Roadmap process).

 The Commission
While the majority of interviewees clearly attributed a central role of EU 
gender equality policy to the Commission, the judgment was rather split 
whether the form of Commission engagement was advantageous or not. 
Overall, the Commission was seen as a proactive institution. Most of the 
time it was considered excellent in finding innovative alternatives when a 
usual path was blocked.

My perception is that the Commission is coming out with its wonderful ideas, not 
only on gender, on whatever, because we sometimes have good ideas. You have 
cheap airlines, you have roaming and these all originated from the Commission 
(…). So the Commission is coming out with some fantastic ideas which shows 

168 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

some strength from our part, because with this power of initiative in many cases 
it is the Commission which determines what we are discussing, what we are talk-
ing about. (Commission official 1:216–218)

The  Commission’s  role  as  a  broker  which  is  capable  of  negotiating 
compromises was particularly emphasised. At the same time, some por-
trayed the Commission as a closed group where external influences would 
not  help  and  where  gender  equality  policy  was  still  ‘ghettoised’,  even 
though those responsible were effective and tried to pull gender equality 
out of the ‘women’s policy ghetto’ (Woodward 2003).

How then can you influence the EU? I would say: try the Women’s Lobby, not 
directly the Commission, that’s useless somehow (…). I mean, do you get any 
serious replies? Except pre-prepared emails? Or everything disappears. I don’t 
have any good experiences. (Expert group representative 9:86–88)

 The Parliament
A broad variety of roles were attributed to the European Parliament. They 
were perceived as an ally vis-a-vis the Commission or Council, as policy 
area experts and as a strong pressure actor with the power to force the 
Commission to become active.

Well, the European Parliament is extremely pushy. It is not always followed. 
Every time they recommend improvements for women in [topic], and not only 
women of course … (Commission official 17:136)

Well, the Parliament is always quite attentive in its control function regarding 
equal opportunities for women. And that can quickly become a political issue. (…) 
The Parliament [is the most important actor], definitely. Not the Council. We, the 
Commission, closely follow the Parliament. (Commission official 4: 89–91)

At the same time, many MEPs perceived conflictual lines between polit-
ical groups inside the FEMM committee that hampered the exertion of 
full pressure, particularly because the rest of the Parliament was perceived 
as not committed.

I first expected it could be a smooth issue, because it seemed to me that the pro-
posal and information coming from the Commission … was based on some, in 
my opinion, reasonable compromises. But the Socialist Party didn’t accept this 
compromise, nor did my political party. My political group was split on this 
issue. (MEP 14:24)

4.1  DEVIATING IN/FORMAL POLICY NETWORKS 

  169

I’ll say only one thing: If I really want to engage in gender equality policy 
and want to be efficient, then I must choose the appropriate political party or 
group.  And  I’m  convinced  that  everything  more  leftist,  this  means,  the 
Greens, the Social Democrats, the Left, works more efficiently and better, it’s 
of bigger concern for them than for the Christian Democrats or the Liberals. 
(MEP 2:66)

 NGOs
The  NGOs  were  presented  as  a  crucial  partner  for  content-related 
exchange; as a contact where proposals and ideas could be tested and a 
pool which could provide gender expertise. NGOs were perceived as lob-
bying  all  main  institutions  and  as  strong  interest  groups,  even  though 
some  interviewees  were  ambiguous  about  the  overall  number  of  stake-
holders who were interested in gender equality policy:

In this committee [FEMM committee] the stakeholders are quite limited, in the 
sense  that  broad  women’s  interests  are  covered  by  umbrella  associations, 
European Women’s Lobby and New Women for Europe. The Women’s Lobby 
was  the  most  active  because  it  is  also  financed  and  has  a  bigger  structure 
throughout Europe. If you get to employment you have the ETUC, confedera-
tion of trade unions, and BusinessEurope for employers. So, you have four main 
stakeholders. (EP official 23:32)

In addition, Commission officials in particular described NGOs as well- 

organised via the institutional gender lunches.

 The Council
The Council was perceived as the most powerful actor and, at the same 
time, as the largest barrier for gender equality policy proposals. This was 
due to the limited gender expertise among member state representatives, 
as well as the Commission’s kind of ‘anticipatory obedience’ to avoid criti-
cal proposals:

What happens in the Council is that they have their standard staff, these are the 
diplomats  who  are  based  here  in  Brussels.  They  are  not  gender  experts. 
(Commission official 1:148)

I mean on other issues like the Open Method of Coordination (…) there is … a 
sort  of  (…)  delicacy  (…)  with  the  member  states  because  the  Commission 
doesn’t want to get the member states sort of angry by this or that. Right? It’s a 
very difficult issue to push. (Commission official 6:34)

170 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

The interesting fact is that Commission officials always described a split 
between the member state gender experts (see below) with whom they 
got along and the non-gender experts in the Council who tended to block 
proposals even if the member state gender experts were the ones who had 
originally submitted a proposal.

 Other Actors
Apart from the four actors, the remaining actors who were perceived as 
important included expert groups, women’s movements and the EU pres-
idency.  Astonishingly,  the  Social  Partners  were  not  part  of  the  picture. 
Expert  groups  were  seen  as  a  scientific  resource  and  a  link  to  a  better 
understanding of national situations.

The women’s movement was described as a pressure interest group that 

might make a difference for activities on a supranational level.

I have seen it—it has been successful. I think it is one way of working, you must 
have the pressure from women’s organisations. If one or two or twenty members 
in a national Parliament or in this Parliament say something, you can’t do 
anything.  But  if  you  can  show  it’s  a  big  interest  from  …  thousands  and 
 thousands  of  women  in  these  organisations,  you  can  have  pressure  on  the 
Commission, the Council and other political groups. (MEP 3:34)

You know, I am sure that without women realising their problem and … not 
accepting the injustice … it’s of vital importance. You can hear what you want 
but when there is no pressure on the national and local level you cannot achieve 
big successes. (MEP 14:79)

The  EU  presidency,  which  was  not  mentioned  a  single  time  for  the 
Roadmap  policy  process,  was  perceived  by  many  actors  (particularly 
NGOs) as the most important link between the supranational and national 
level. The presidency could provide a ‘window of opportunity’ (Kingdon 
1984) when a topic or directive was tabled by selecting individual topics 
for the presidency.

In  summary,  when  asked  about  gender  equality  policy,  interviewees 
referred to a broad range of actors who were involved in policy-making 
and allocated distinct roles to them. When comparing this set-up to the 
Roadmap process in the following section, a qualitative network analysis 
reveals important differences.

4.1  DEVIATING IN/FORMAL POLICY NETWORKS 

  171

4.1.2 

  Visualised Actor Constellations of the Roadmap Process

How do you capture which networks exist in everyday working situations 
and where? Why are the networks stable? What kind of meaning do the 
people who are involved in EU policy-making attribute to them? These 
are core questions for network analyses—either quantitative or qualitative. 
The Qualitative Network Analysis (QNA) offered a unique opportunity to 
combine  three  aspects—micro-perspective,  qualitative  approach  and 
insider perspective—in an innovative way in this research.

The general premise of QNA is that networks do not exist indepen-
dently from individuals, but that individuals are essential to any aspect of 
networks. At the same time networks may enable and constrain individuals 
in their actions. Social network analysis tends to forget that—although it is 
possible to describe and visualise networks between institutions, organisa-
tions, etc—there are still individuals in all of these institutions who influ-
ence the network and anything associated with it. This is exactly where 
QNA starts and where one can tease out the subjective interpretation of 
networks.3 It helps the analysis of everyday communication and actions, 
their formal and informal content and the role time constraints may play.

Important tools in qualitative network analysis are network maps with 
the primary function of generating narratives on personal systems of rele-
vance and meaning (Hollstein and Pfeffer 2010). For this research I used 
the  well-known  tool  of  QNA,  the  ‘hierarchical  mapping  technique’  by 
Kahn and Antonucci (1980), also called the ‘method of concentric cir-
cles’. During interviews QNA was used as a medium of communication 
and, at the same time, for the result of the interview (Hollstein and Pfeffer 
2010). Interviewees received a paper with a limited number of concentric 
circles where they placed labels with different actors they mentioned dur-
ing the interview.4 The maps offered the chance to gather illustrations of 
differences between formal and informal actors’ relationships and discuss 
them in the context of EU gender equality policy-making in general.

The formal and informal network maps provided a better understand-
ing  of  how  interviewees  ranked  their  contacts  regarding  closeness/dis-
tance  and  who  was  seen  as  most  important  or  necessary  in  the  policy 
process. Surprisingly, the network maps often supplied a different picture 
of relevance than the narratives. Overall, the actors’ understanding of who 
is considered in charge of EU gender equality policy programmes steered 
their engagement in the policy process.

172 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

Network maps were analysed in two respects: (1) which actors played a 
major role across all formal and informal network maps; (2) how actors 
related to each other in the informal and formal network maps which were 
designed by individual interviewees.

 Actors Across Formal and Informal Network Maps
Overall, the network maps included significantly more actors than were 
mentioned in the general narrative. The notable exception was the Council 
representative who only provided a formal network map that included the 
Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG  Employment  and  the  FEMM  committee 
(even though there was no formal necessity to contact the FEMM com-
mittee) (cf. Fig. 4.1). The Council representative subsequently denied an 
informal network map, arguing that s/he had no informal contacts with 
regard to the Roadmap.

DG EMPL Unit

FEMM Committee

Fig. 4.1  Formal network map council

4.1  DEVIATING IN/FORMAL POLICY NETWORKS 

  173

Formal and informal maps showed clear differences. On the formal net-
work  maps  the  three  main  EU  institutions—Commission,  Council  and 
Parliament—outnumbered  any  other  actor.  On  the  informal  network 
maps,  however,  NGOs  and  national  institutions  dominated  and  the 
 importance of the Council and the European Parliament was diminished. 
Only the Commission was still seen as important (Ahrens 2011).

A comparison of the network maps with the description of the Roadmap 
process over the course of time revealed that interviewees connected the 
formal  and  informal  maps  to  either  the  internal  or  external  process.  In 
general, the informal maps displayed more interinstitutional groups, more 
(scientific) expert groups and more links to national actors. While indi-
viduals, such as Commissioners on formal maps, were only mentioned by 
the  European  Women’s  Lobby,  they  appeared  more  often  in  informal 
maps of NGOs, some DGs and the European Parliament (Ahrens 2011).

 Relational Placement of Actors on Formal and Informal Network Maps
An  analysis  of  the  Roadmap  drafting  and  adoption  process  showed  the 
great  importance  of  rules  for  actors.  The  formal  and  informal  network 
maps confirmed that only interviewees from the three major institutions 
(Commission, Council and EP) produced a strict distinction between for-
mal and informal ties, similar to their narrative in their networks’ maps. 
Non-governmental actors did not appear on their formal network maps. 
The comparison of the included actors exactly mirrored the formal rules 
and  procedures  according  to  the  treaties  and  organisational  rules.  This 
means that Commission officials only mentioned internal decision-making 
processes and actors connected to them, such as the interservice consulta-
tion and the Commissioners’ College.

The formal network map of one DG demonstrated the internal formal 
process of the Roadmap communication in detailed steps (cf. Fig. 4.2). 
The placement of the different steps disclosed the Commission official’s 
perception of her/his distance from the final decision. In the formal net-
work map of another DG (cf. Fig. 4.3) a Commission official who was 
more  involved  in  all  steps  of  the  adoption  process  listed  similar  actors, 
although they were ordered in different spaces; e.g. the cabinet was located 
very close to the interviewee, while other units of the same DG were more 
distant. Therefore, depending on their different involvement in the policy 
process, the two Commission officials translated the formal policy process 
in two different pictures which help us understand their different involve-
ment in the Roadmap policy process.

174 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

RELEX Family

Interservice Consultation

Cabinet

COM College

COREPER

Council

Fig. 4.2  Formal network map DG I

The network maps highlighted the fact that the interviewees tended to 
narrate a simplified version of their everyday routines regarding the formal 
policy process. While the focus in the narratives was clearly on the major 
players and the formal steps, the network maps equated the formal steps 
with power relations in a spatial relationship.

Network maps often included other spaces where actors discussed 
the Roadmap, which were not previously mentioned in their narrative. 
The formal contacts of political parties in the EP, for example, included 
a variety of contacts that were connected to the group (party members, 
working  group),  as  well  as  meetings  with  other  rapporteurs  (cf. 
Fig. 4.4).

The  MEP  described  their  formal  contacts  in  the  same  way  as  the 
Commission, including actors of their own institution and the Commission. 
An  occasional  exception  was  the  inclusion  of  NGOs  in  an  outer  circle. 

4.1  DEVIATING IN/FORMAL POLICY NETWORKS 

  175

Advisory Committee

Interservice Consultation

COM College

Working Ground COM IA

Cabinet

DG EMPL other

Member Cabinets

Fig. 4.3  Formal network map DG II

Contacting them seemed to be perceived as a formal obligation and was 
mirrored in the interviews when they described the set-up of the EP reso-
lution through the organisation of the mini-hearing.

The  description  of  formal  networks  by  the  Social  Partners  was  very 
similar  and  mentioned  established  channels  of  communication  with  the 
Commission, Council and Parliament (cf. Fig. 4.5). The network maps 
created  by  NGOs  and  national  women’s  agencies  did  not  make  such  a 
clear distinction between the actors they mentioned for the formal and 
informal  maps;  both  predominantly  mentioned  EU  institutions  and 
national member organisations as their formal ties (cf. Fig. 4.6).

While the EU institutions were mentioned in the narratives when, for 
example, the EWL described the involvement of their national members 
in  the  general  assembly,  the  interviewee  did  not  mention  any  formal 
rule which obliged them to contact the EU institutions. This became  

176 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

FEMM

Trilog

Shadowmeeting

Part Members

Working Group PSE
NGO

Fig. 4.4  Formal network map MEP

further evident when comparing their network map with that from the 
EU institutions where the EWL was not included in the formal maps of 
the Commission. The formal maps of both the Commission and EWL 
were an expression of the formal rules for Commission communications 
and how they were translated into everyday routines. All Commission 
officials knew that NGOs were not included in the formal drafting pro-
cess  of  the  Roadmap.  Likewise,  the  EWL  established  its  own  formal 
routine of contacting the Commission when the new proposal was at 
hand.

In  terms  of  the  informal  network  the  Commission  and  Parliament 
included a wide range of actors; however, the contacts they mentioned 
were  hardly  mirrored  in  the  network  maps  of  those  actors.  In  general, 
NGOs tended to include fewer actors than on a formal level.

4.2  RESHUFFLING THE POLICY GAME 

  177

DG EMPL Unit

EP

ETUC Women’s Committee

Advisory Committee

Fig. 4.5  Formal network map Social Partner

4.2 

  reshuffling the Policy game—rotating 

actors in genDer equality

While the fluctuation of personnel is a common routine in EU administra-
tion,5 the consequences are rarely analysed. Fluctuation occurs at different 
levels at different times, e.g. in the European Parliament MEPs change 
with  either  EU  or  national  elections.  The  Commissioners  have  a  pre- 
defined five-year term and the Commission personnel comprises perma-
nent  and  non-permanent  civil  servants;  so-called  ex-pats.  Fluctuation 
influenced  gender  equality  policy-making,  the  Roadmap  policy  process 
and the way in which interviewees interpreted the drafting and adoption 
process of the Roadmap. The Commission played a key role, as it is by 
definition constantly subject to fluctuation. From the interviews it became 
evident  that  fluctuation  was  a  typical  feature  in  the  Commission,  while 

178 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

Council

Presidency

EWL members

DG EMPL Commission

DG EMPL Director

DG EMPL Unit

DG other Cc

EP EMP

Fig. 4.6  Formal network map NGO

interviewees from all other institutions and organisations seldom reported 
fluctuation within their organisation. They only reported fluctuation for 
political leaders or Commission staff.

Fluctuation also means that civil servants could not decide their duties 
by themselves. The responsibility for a task might be shifted to another 
civil servant, while the previous one would be given a new task or trans-
ferred  to  a  new  position.  Such  changes  were  difficult  to  predict  over  a 
longer period of time and they made it difficult to trace responsibility and 
ownership. Fluctuations disrupted and interrupted the smooth running of 
processes; e.g. those responsible in DG Research had not been in charge 
of gender equality prior to 2006 and took over the subject from a col-
league who left. One policy advisor who took over responsibilities for the 
Roadmap immediately after its adoption in late 2006 was not involved in 

4.2  RESHUFFLING THE POLICY GAME 

  179

its design, nevertheless s/he was responsible for implementing it. Those 
who left were no longer directly responsible for gender equality in their 
new job.

The  permanent  fluctuation  was  annoying  to  those  who  were  fre-
quently  in  contact  with  Commission  officials,  like  this  member  of  an 
expert group:

A: There is this crazy change of personnel. There is no stability of personnel, also 
with the persons you are working with: it is gigantic! The ones who attend the 
meetings change continuously. And there are almost never the same ones. That 
is, in my opinion, quite bizarre.
Q: This means, in your meetings almost always other people attended?
A: Well, [name] always attends. Yet, who is responsible for our group changes 
almost  from  one  meeting  to  the  next.  I  don’t  know  whether  that  is  a  career 
opportunity or handicap to have worked there, but obviously they guide through 
young civil servants on a massive scale, they stay there for two, three years, a 
maximum of five, and then they leave to wherever. (Expert group representa-
tive 9:46–48)

Other interviewees perceived job change as an opportunity to dissemi-
nate gender expertise or develop connections that transcend different lev-
els of governance:

Every time one of our colleagues leaves his/her unit and goes into another DG, 
we know we will have an agent there. That is essential. A gender-aware col-
league in DG Transport …, in DG Employment we have many, but there they 
have gender awareness. But we had colleagues who went to other DGs where 
there is no gender interest, because they sometimes don’t really see the gender- 
related  issues  and  that  happens  quite  often,  unfortunately.  So  we  are  really 
happy sometimes, because we lose a colleague, but we gain a ‘007 agent’ some-
where else, who is able to put the right word in the right ear and maybe make 
something happen. (Commission official 17:20)

For this Commission official the already established connections with 
their colleagues guaranteed support in promoting gender equality. They 
implemented gender mainstreaming in Commission units that were usu-
ally not concerned with the topic or even reluctant to cooperate. So the 
previous colleague helped to disseminate gender expertise.

While  some  people  functioned  as  disseminators  many  others  were 
subject to mobility rules and ‘lost expertise’, as they left the policy area 

180 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

typical 

and  no  longer  participated  in  EU  gender  equality  policy.  Politicians, 
commissioners  and  cabinet  members, 
‘gender  heroes’ 
(Woodward 2003) were often included in this group.6 It is significant 
that  interviewees  only  mentioned  females.  Hoskyns  (2008)  already 
pointed out that in the Santer Commission (1995–1999) only the five 
female Commissioners initiated projects on gender mainstreaming in 
their  DGs.  Not  only  was  gender  expertise  lost  but,  more  crucially, 
powerful people disappeared and the working level lost support from 
the top level.

When such lost expertise occurred at the working level, it always meant 
a loss of process knowledge and information about the history of develop-
ments or the importance of certain policies:

Here, this is a note from my colleague who left saying ‘you may need to include 
something on the Roadmap in the speech’. So, this is the kind of input you have. 
(Commission official 17:107)

The dissemination network points to a broadening of gender equality 
expertise and the lost expertise to a narrowing. Both can be used to qualify 
the influence of employees’ fluctuation on the substance or accountability 
of gender equality policy.

In terms of the Roadmap one can make a similar distinction between 
‘newbies’ and ‘oldies’. These played a major role in the interpretation of 
the policy process. ‘Newbies’ are defined as persons who had not partici-
pated in gender equality policy before the Roadmap was drafted or joined 
the process during or after its adoption. By contrast, ‘oldies’ are people 
who were involved in EU gender equality policy at least one year before 
the Roadmap drafting started. However, the term ‘newbie’ did not neces-
sarily  mean  limited  gender  expertise;  indeed,  the  opposite  can  be  true. 
Likewise, ‘oldie’ did not necessarily specify well-developed gender exper-
tise. Despite being classified as an ‘oldie’, s/he might also be part of the 
dissemination  process.  They  could  be  switching  from  one  position  to 
another while still responsible for gender equality policy; they could be 
working on a different level of hierarchy, in a merging/splitting unit or a 
different policy area.7

These  two  aspects  affected  the  process  of  policy-making.  If  people 
stayed, they were ‘in the process’, whereas if they left and someone new 
came in, the process was interrupted.

4.2  RESHUFFLING THE POLICY GAME 

  181

4.2.1 

  The ‘Satisfied Newbies’ and ‘Irritated Oldies’

The different interpretations of the drafting process as ‘standard procedure’ 
or  ‘deviation’  can  be  explained  by  the  different  working  experiences  of 
interviewees, e.g. by the time they spent in gender equality policy. Those 
who participated for a long time (with the exception of the Gender Equality 
Unit) were also those who expected negotiations with stakeholders, because 
it had always been like that. The ‘oldies’ expected the gender mainstreaming 
logic and the tradition from previous programmes. By contrast, the ‘new-
bies had not participated for a long time and approached the topic through 
new  EU  policies  which  were  affected  by  gender  mainstreaming.  They 
applied their institutional logic and only expected the Commission rules.

The Gender Equality Unit used both: the Commission routines and 
gender  mainstreaming  logic  to  justify  the  drafting  process.  Inside  the 
Commission  they  emphasised  gender  mainstreaming  implementation 
guidelines, whereas to external stakeholders they emphasised Commission 
rules for setting up a communication.

 The ‘Newbies’
‘Newbies’ rarely expected consultations with external stakeholders. They 
only talked about the internal Commission process, as described in the 
previous chapters. They were satisfied with the policy process because they 
did not know any different. This particularly applies to the Commission 
and new MEPs, as well as some NGOs who were new to the area.

The closer Commission officials were connected to the Gender Equality 
Unit of DG Employment, the more they knew about the Roadmap. If 
they did not significantly contribute to one of the planned actions, they 
often  did  not  even  know  about  the  Roadmap’s  existence.  These  non- 
participating actors even mistook the internal human resources manage-
ment  of  DG  Administration  for  the  Roadmap  and  only  talked  about 
quotas for women (Annex III ‘Equal Opportunities policy between men 
and women at the European Commission’).8 It was revealing that DGs 
which were only involved in the internal gender equality policies without 
any  content-related  contribution  to  the  Roadmap,  also  rejected  any 
content- related connection to gender equality policy in their policy area. 
For them it was solely the responsibility of DG Employment (Interview 
13). During an interview with a Commission official we both realised that 
s/he did not know about the Roadmap after we had already talked about 
EU gender equality policy for more than twenty-five minutes:

182 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

Q: I don’t know how well you know the Roadmap…
A: Which Roadmap?
Q: The Roadmap for gender equality. When you think about it, how would you 
assess the Roadmap in regard to the priority areas?
A: Well, I don’t remember details, but I had the impression that it was quite 
comprehensive.  There  were  concrete  goals,  quite  practical  measures,  leaving 
room for the directorates general for manoeuvre how to approach this task, an 
exchange of best practice and I think the networks of female managers have 
been of great importance.
Q: Hmm, well I meant the Roadmap that addressed a variety of policy areas, 
such as employment, education, research, political representation …
A: Excuse me, are we actually talking about the same Roadmap? The internal 
Commission …
Q: … no, exactly…
A: … so, what kind of Roadmap was that?
Q:  The  Roadmap  for  equality.  That’s  it  [shows  document].  And  the  action 
plan, addressing the internal one you spoke of was in this part the annex.
A: Honestly … I don’t know this Roadmap. (Commission official 4:42–51)

 The ‘Oldies’
Only stakeholders who had participated in EU gender equality policy for 
years and had a long-time routine in gender equality policy were critical of 
the Roadmap policy process or—in the case of the Council and the EP—
expected that the Commission consulted stakeholders, such as the EWL 
and Social Partners. The ‘oldies’ from the EP were predominantly long- 
term committee members, particularly those who wrote the resolution. 
Regardless of whether they were from the EWL, the member states or the 
EP,  the  ‘oldies’  expected  something  different  within  the  range  of 
possibilities.

At  the  same  time,  we  can  see  how  those  long-term  gender  equality 
policy actors linked the past and future in an attempt to explain the shifts 
from the framework strategy to the Roadmap. They knew that there had 
been changes inside the Commission, to which Commission officials had 
to adjust.

Those  from  the  Commission  were  aware  that  the  Roadmap  was  not 
sufficient to implement gender equality policy in the member states, as 
they constantly stressed that the Roadmap would not work without the 
member states. They were implicitly aware that it represented a deteriora-
tion of the framework strategy, even though they defended the Roadmap. 
If they had considered the Roadmap as sufficient, they would not have 

4.3  ACCEPTING DIVIDED COMPETENCIES 

  183

urged the member states to take action themselves.9 ‘Commission oldies’ 
knew from their experience that the Roadmap would have less impact in 
comparison to the previous period and that they could not do anything 
within the constraints of the Commission routines. The unintended con-
sequence of this self-limitation was a limited impact of EU gender equality 
policy in the member states.

It is important to note that those who always participated in gender 
equality policy have really incorporated gender mainstreaming as a strat-
egy, even though they simply did not get through to others who were not 
involved on an everyday basis. Not only did they understand gender main-
streaming, they even gave it absolute priority. There was no urge and no 
comparable standard EP procedure for the FEMM committee to involve 
such a large number of committees. The same applies to the Commission 
and  to  some  extent  to  the  non-governmental  organisations  that  were 
organised via the gender lunches. They covered a broad range of policy 
issues and organisations which came from a wide variety of sources.

4.3 

  accePting DiviDeD comPetencies

The  interpretations  of  the  standard  process  implicitly  point  to  another 
important  aspect  of  EU  integration,  i.e.  the  internal  division  of  labour 
or—who has the competency for what? This includes subsidiarity10 and the 
way in which competencies are split among EU institutions. Both, subsid-
iarity and competency split, affected the way the process was interpreted, 
particularly in terms of the Roadmap’s legislative scope. The two systems 
are closely interwoven and caused unintended consequences for gender 
equality policy.

4.3.1 

  The Competencies and Subsidiarity

The Commission has the power to initiate and propose legislation, as well 
as the power to control and monitor the implementation of laws, particu-
larly the treaties, and to set the European agenda (Klüver 2012). The so- 
called right to initiative, the right to propose new supranational legislation, 
lay only with the Commission11 at the time of the Roadmap. Consequently, 
there was no chance for any new hard law, such as a directive, without a 
Commission proposal. Neither the parliament nor the member states had 
the power to propose new legislation,12 even though the FEMM commit-
tee and the Advisory Committee favoured legislation on gender  budgeting 

184 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

or gender mainstreaming. Furthermore, the Commission cannot dictate 
how  member  states  transpose  a  directive;  it  can  only  monitor  whether 
transposition happened and to what extent.13 The system of policy- making 
is characterised by negotiations and consent, and all institutions are careful 
to ensure a stable equilibrium. Back then, the process of policy-making 
inside the Commission was already so long and complicated that problem-
atic agendas were often kept outside (Hix 2006).

 Subsidiarity as a Relief
The  interviews  gave  the  impression  that  civil  servants  limited  delicate 
actions, which were proposed in relation to the Roadmap, to avoid conflicts 
with member states. If they had aimed to challenge member states on spe-
cific gender equality issues, they would have had to convince the majority 
of  twenty-seven  member  states  of  a  supranational  regulation  that  would 
harmonise existing national regulation. Since member states have in the last 
decade generally tended to insist on subsidiarity, the Commission was aware 
that member states were quite reluctant to adopt new legislation. Therefore, 
adopting a benign Roadmap agenda by foregoing legislative proposals dis-
burdened the drafting and adoption process from the consultation with the 
EP or the Council. The Roadmap was prepared under constant time pres-
sure and any legislative proposal might have caused a delay of the already 
heavy-going process. This was not acceptable in view of the pressure from 
stakeholders to publish a new gender equality policy programme.

However, abandoning legislation or actions in member states had the 
unintended consequence that specific transnational gender equality policy 
became invisible. The Roadmap impact assessment stated explicitly that 
‘[t]he  main  challenge  of  this  option  [the  Roadmap],  however,  is  that  the 
required  political  commitment  by  Member  States  may  not  always  be  pres-
ent.’14  By  emphasising  that  gender  equality  policy  cannot  be  effectively 
implemented  without  the  actions  of  member  states,  the  Commission’s 
civil  servants  showed  that  they  were  extremely  aware  of  the  risk  when 
excluding  actions  that  had  existed  in  the  previous  framework  strategy. 
Indeed, this emphasis was noticed by the Council:

This Roadmap is quite different from the one before. The Commission under-
lined that it can’t work on its own. It needs the work of the Council, the ministers 
and the national countries to go on with some points and it made it fairly clear 
… , it was asking for commitment from the different member states, and that 
was quite different from before, and I think that the member states did under-
stand that the Commission can’t do it on its own. (Council representative 5:24)

4.3  ACCEPTING DIVIDED COMPETENCIES 

  185

However,  the  Council  and  the  member  states  stuck  to  their  institu-
tional roles and routines. They adopted the gender equality pact, but they 
did not set up national actions themselves. The Commission probably had 
different expectations regarding the gender equality pact. They thought 
that if they could bring the member states to agree upon a programme 
which  replaced  the  former  action  programme  this  would  mean  imple-
menting  the  Roadmap.  However,  the  member  states  did  not  organise 
themselves. They rather stressed that they were not responsible; therefore 
the Commission would have been crucial in order to set up a common 
gender equality policy programme with impact in member states.

The commitment of the Council and the European Parliament is not so intense, 
there  is  not  really  an  implication  of  the  Council.  We  always  said,  oh  yes 
Commission,  it’s  very  good  and  we  will  help  you,  but  there  is  no  immediate 
responsibility for the Council. (Council representative 5:18)

It  seemed  that  in  times  of  the  constitutional  crisis,15  any  attempt  to 
harmonise  further  gender  equality  as  an  element  of  Social  Europe  was 
doomed to fail. No surprise: these policies would have cost the member 
states money, as they would have had to change their social spending (van 
der Vleuten 2007).

The decision to adopt the Roadmap as a communication without an 
action programme (that would have required agreement from the EP and 
the Council) changed the way in which the Council acted and how it per-
ceived its responsibility for gender equality policy:

That [communication] is a big difference to a directive. It’s [the Commission] 
putting it [the directive] on the table. But afterwards it will be the responsi-
bility of the Council. It’s a directive adopted by the Council. The Roadmap is 
not  adopted  by  the  Council.  You  see,  that  is  a  big  difference.  It  has  a  big 
influence on how we were looking at this document. We’re just looking at this 
document as some kind of information that is given to us. (Council repre-
sentative 5:96)

The  Council  representative  explained  that  the  Roadmap  sparked  no 
commitment on the part of the Council, even though the Commission 
tried  to  secure  the  national  application  by  supporting  and  drafting  the 
‘European Pact for Gender Equality’ in the High Level Group on Gender 
Mainstreaming.  Only  legislative  proposals  with  implementation  duties 
cause attention in the Council.

186 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

 Missing Legislative Proposals
As the Commission is the only EU actor that can propose legislation, com-
plaints about the missing legislation help to identify the actors’ bounded-
ness  and  their  structural  constraints.  A  large  number  of  stakeholders 
forcefully complained about the Roadmap’s lack of legislative proposals. 
At the same time, Commission officials never mentioned the missing leg-
islation. On the contrary, the Commission’s response to the EP resolution 
claimed that legislation would be forthcoming. The Commission stated 
that  ‘[t]he  Roadmap  proposes  various  legislative  measures.  Firstly,  the 
Commission will continue to monitor the application of legislation on gender 
equality in the member states (…). In its concern to improve legislation, the 
Commission also proposes to conduct an analysis of equality legislation16 (…).’
Astonishingly, the Commission responded to the accusation that legis-
lative proposals were missing by equating legislative proposals with moni-
toring the implementation of directives. They euphemised their activities 
in  a  similar  way  on  the  missing  consultation  with  stakeholders. 
Unsurprisingly, this annoyed their counterparts:

You always have to look at all the European instruments together. (…) And so you 
have to look at legislation, funds, process of convergence, social dialogue—all these 
things  together  make  gender  equality  policy.  When  you  had  the  previous  pro-
grammes,—although it was not very ambitious, not very new—at the same time 
you  had  very  important  improvements  of  the  European  legislation.  But  now, 
that’s not the case anymore. So one could have hoped that the Roadmap would 
have been really ambitious, but it wasn’t. (Member state representative 28:54)

Member  state  representatives  from  the  interinstitutional  groups 
(Advisory  Committee,  High  Level  Group  on  Gender  Mainstreaming) 
were not only aware of the consequences of excluding legislative proposals 
in  the  Roadmap,  they  even  suggested  a  law  on  gender  mainstreaming 
when they informally met in advance to negotiate strategic moves:

When the meeting started at 10, we met at 9.30 to get together with the ones 
necessary to push a topic. (…) This was the case with the law on gender main-
streaming: it became interesting to Sweden and the Netherlands, they talked to 
the Commission as well and then it appeared on the agenda. We failed, but it 
was still discussed. (Member state representative 8:47)

Such action was described by Keck and Sikkink (1998) as a ‘boomerang’. 
The member state representatives wanted to extend the content of gender 

4.3  ACCEPTING DIVIDED COMPETENCIES 

  187

equality policy by using the EU level to develop tools that improve national 
policies. Interestingly, in the case of the European Union it was not wom-
en’s  organisations  that  became  active,  but  rather  representatives  from 
national ministries. They were aware that gender mainstreaming legisla-
tion  could  be  best  enforced  by  a  supranational  demand  from  the  EU, 
which defines the acquis communautaire regarding gender mainstreaming 
in the member states. Member states’ representatives had an informal rule 
about advance meetings and preparing positions while the Commission 
officials were not around. The quote suggests that chats among member 
state representatives were rare and that they needed to make time before 
supranational meetings took place. Further descriptions of the interviewee 
explained that it was common to contact the Commission from time to 
time and that some member states did so, although contacts among mem-
ber states were not usual.

The  quote  suggests  that  the  lobby  activity  was  successful  at  an  early 
stage and that member state representatives managed to put the gender 
mainstreaming legislation on the agenda via the Advisory Committee. In 
their  commonly  adopted  opinion17  the  committee  members  also  sug-
gested specific legislation on gender mainstreaming for the EU, as well as 
for the member state level. However, they failed in the end. The Roadmap 
timeline highlighted that the meetings with the Advisory Committee took 
place while the Commission drafted the proposal internally. This means 
that the Commission, or more specifically DG Employment, must have 
taken it off because they were the only ones who had contact with the 
Advisory Committee. It is not possible to ascertain why DG Employment 
decided  to  dismiss  the  proposal.  They  never  mentioned  a  proposal  for 
gender mainstreaming legislation, even though the interview included a 
direct question about additional Roadmap content that was excluded or 
included.

It is speculative why the Commission decided not to propose legisla-
tion, although the member states pushed for a law on gender mainstream-
ing via the Advisory Committee. Ultimately, the proposed legislation was 
probably only supported by the so-called gender equality forerunners—e.g. 
Sweden, Netherlands, Finland and Belgium. When the Commission rep-
resentatives talked bilaterally to other member state representatives, they 
might  have  had  to  acknowledge  that  there  was  no  chance  of  adopting 
gender mainstreaming legislation in the Council.

Explanations  for  missing  legislation  and  some  other  kinds  of  actions 
were  implicitly  provided  by  a  Commission  interviewee  who  stated  that 

188 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

there were problems with the administrative DGs (Interview 17). They 
were calling for measureable, quantifiable working steps in the Roadmap, 
while the Gender Equality Unit in DG Employment fought to retain the 
qualitative  aspects  rather  than  keeping  quantifiable  goals  only.  Another 
interviewee from the EP illustrated the general challenge of gender equal-
ity legislation by comparing the discussions about gender pay gap with a 
discussion about the death penalty:

A: One … of the explanations that you have is this paradox, having such a 
strong statement in the Treaty makes it very difficult to go for a compromise in 
implementation.
Q: Because it’s so strong that you can’t … well, it’s very clear … it’s just …
A: It [the gender pay gap] cannot exist. I mean it’s like the death penalty. The 
death penalty is not acceptable. Ok, by 2015 we will reduce it 30% … No, it does 
not exist. It’s the same concept. From a legal point of view, it’s not sustainable 
to admit that this [the legislation on the gender pay gap] has existed for 33 years 
and we have done nothing. (EP official 23:138–140)

The  EP  official  explained  that  negotiations  about  legislation  became 
difficult when the treaties and the proposed constitution included gender 
equality  or  at  least  equal  opportunities  between  women  and  men  as  a 
norm.  Eradicating  inequalities  would  become  a  question  of  immediate 
implementation. When legislation forbids unequal pay, discussions about 
reducing the pay gap automatically contradict the law. With this in mind, 
discussions  about  further  gender  equality  legislation  would  always  be 
postponed, as member states usually feared the costs of such laws (Van der 
Vleuten 2007).

Overall,  it  was  not  only  the  member  state  representatives  who  were 
unsatisfied  with  the  missing  legislation.  Almost  all  other  stakeholders 
(MEPs,  NGOs,  Social  Partners)  also  criticised  the  lack  of  proposals.  A 
trade union interviewee expressed the same embarrassment as the EP offi-
cial about the missing legislation in the Roadmap:

Really, there’s nothing. So, I mean that’s something that we’re picking up and 
we said it and we say it and we say it and we say it. (…) You know, on child-
care, for example, there were targets in Barcelona to have childcare for kids 0-3 
and 3-6. There’s been no follow-up, nothing. They exist, but because they’re not 
integrated into anything, they’re out there. And if you remember them: fine, if 
you don’t: it doesn’t really matter. (…) In a lot of other areas nothing exists, 
that needs to change, you need to put instruments into place. You need to give 
instruments, some kind of tool, some kind of meat behind them, some kind of 

4.3  ACCEPTING DIVIDED COMPETENCIES 

  189

power, so they can actually force change because leaving things in a wishy-washy 
language would be fine if you lived in an ideal world where everything worked 
but … we don’t. So you need to have something which obliges forces, where you 
have a name and shame, where you do something to try and get something to 
happen and if you don’t do that, it’s just going to slide and become less impor-
tant and everything becomes merged and you end up with nothing, with no 
progress. And that’s not something that we want. I don’t think it’s something 
that the Commission, certainly not the people working in the area, want, but 
it’s a very, very big struggle. (Social partner representative 31:94)

This quotation shows that the trade unions were not satisfied with the 
content and set-up of the Roadmap. They expected restrictive goals and 
new  instruments  in  gender  equality  policy.  The  interviewee  clearly 
expressed his/her disappointment with EU gender equality policy and the 
overall process of the Roadmap, as well as the fact that s/he approached 
the Commission to lobby for more legislation. The interviewee linked the 
question of legislation with the question of accountability and pointed to 
the constraints people faced in the Commission.

A similar concern about the missing link between content and imple-

mentation was expressed by a NGO representative:

The problem is how the Commission then decided to tackle this [the content and 
goals]. Because in many instances it’s using existing programmes or existing 
funding, there is no specific funding provided for it. And then there is the use of 
programmes that exist already, so that it is difficult to see how that coordination 
will be made, especially if it is an existing programme and especially if it is 
managed at the national level. So there are very big objectives and a good anal-
ysis, but the means to really do something are sometimes really modest in rela-
tion to what seems to be the intention. And also the other problem is that there 
is very little binding legislation, and also this role on gender mainstreaming 
that would be necessary is not visible in the Commission itself. (NGO represen-
tative 29:40)

Almost all external actors were baffled with the way in which the Roadmap 
and its content was set up. Where does their dissatisfaction come from? It 
is only understandable when you look back in time and look at the rules. 
The former framework strategy included actions which were directed to 
member states and trade unions and—within all its limits—this was some-
thing that trade unions, NGOs and member states, etc were used to. This 
reflected the routine procedure for gender equality policy programmes in 
the European Union.

190 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

The  Commission  changed  the  rules  of  the  game  for  the  Roadmap. 

Some interviewees provided explanations:

The problem that you … can have concrete actions only if you have the power to 
do so … and the member states have the power. (Commission official 33:37)

We cannot put in the Roadmap a wish list of what we would like the member 
states to do. And actually negotiation is something that the Commission does all 
the time with the member states at a level where it’s at … which is not mine. 
(Commission official 25:107)

For  those  responsible,  it  was  a  logical  consequence  and  a  relief  to 
change the format and scope of the policy programme. Because it was so 
logical and routine they saw no obligation to communicate these changes. 
They were completely satisfied with the Roadmap and convinced that it 
was much better than before. The competing structures of the Commission 
and the external actors are revealed: the Commission understands it as the 
best way of sharing responsibilities and duties, a logical split of areas of 
influence;  whereas  the  other  actors  perceive  it  as  a  retreat  of  the 
Commission’s duties, an escape from former paths.

As  a  consequence,  two  competing  narratives  were  constructed.  The 
narrative for the Commission read: ‘no legislation required and no one in 
favour of it’; while the narrative for the NGOs, EP, Social Partners and 
member  states  read:  ‘missed  opportunity  for  tougher  legislation’.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  the  external  actors  sometimes  mentioned  their 
awareness of the Commission’s limitations and the pressure to put aside 
legislation:

It’s just like if the Commission understands that the acquis communautaire 
would say what it did in 2000, let’s say, and won’t evolve for years and years. So 
they had to change their strategy, so the Roadmap is probably the result of this 
awareness  of  the  difficulty  to  have  a  common  position  on  this  legislation. 
(Member state representative 28:164)

These actors expressed their understanding of certain constraints, even 
though the Commission officials rarely stated explicitly that opportunities 
for new legislation were constrained.

It makes a difference where you are institutionally socialised—and all 
interviewees  stuck  to  their  institutional  routines.  The  EP,  Council  and 
Social Partners waited for the Commission to make use of its right to initi-

4.4  ASYNCHRONOUS TIMING IMPEDING CONSISTENCY 

  191

ate new legislation and did not understand that the Commission saw no 
reason to propose any. On the contrary, they did not perceive an opportu-
nity to get a new piece of legislation adopted, because there were no more 
subjects covered by the treaties. It is certainly not useful now to discuss 
which  kind  of  directives  could  have  been  passed.  However,  foregoing 
 legislative proposals contradict the general approach of the Commission as 
the ‘agenda-setter’. The Commission had always aimed to cover new pol-
icy issues and drag them to the supranational level (Hix 2006).

The  narrative  of  the  Commission  officials  is  rather  contested.  It  is 
astonishing that it is so dominant and unquestioned, it does not even give 
the  impression  that  legislation  was  ever  discussed  as  an  option.  This 
homogenous narrative functions as a self-justification vis-a-vis other actors. 
However,  the  response  to  the  EP  resolution  affirms  a  diverging  under-
standing of what can be called legislation. It is interesting to note how the 
Commission redefined the call for legislation.

 The Relationship Between Process and Content
For the interpretation of the policy process it was crucial to look at the 
content of the Roadmap, because the way the Roadmap was interpreted 
determined the final content. An interviewee complained about issues s/
he tried to put on the agenda, particularly legislative acts, before they were 
excluded later on. This tells us something about how the process was used 
to shape the content of the Roadmap in a particular way. By limiting the 
Roadmap to a Commission communication without further negotiations 
with other actors, the Commission had the power to exclude specific pro-
posals, even if they were put forward by all external actors.

All claims about legislation and the complaints about process are deeply 
connected. If the Commission had chosen to include member states and 
trade unions in the implementation, as in the previous policy programmes, 
they  would  have  needed  additional  time  for  negotiations  and  consulta-
tions. This might have overloaded the already complicated process in the 
Commission.

4.4 

  asynchronous timing imPeDing consistency

The publication date of the Roadmap and its time span went almost unno-
ticed and was seldom mentioned as an important point during the inter-
views.  However,  the  question  of  timing  implicitly  played  a  role  in  the 
narratives; e.g. the Roadmap covered the time from 2006 to 2010, yet  

192 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

it was published at the beginning of March 2006. This meant that two 
months had already passed before there could be any official action with 
reference to the Roadmap. Programmes were usually adopted before they 
started, not afterwards, as was the case with the Roadmap. The previous 
Community action programme, which was tied to the framework strategy, 
was extended in September 2005 until 31st December 2006 and one of 
the reasons stated was that PROGRESS would not begin before 2007.18

The previous framework strategy was published in June 2000, almost 
half  a  year  before  it  started.  The  annotated  Fifth  Community  Action 
Programme  on  Equal  Opportunities  (2001–2005)  was  adopted  by  the 
Council  and  the  EP  in  December  2000.  Surprisingly,  not  a  single  inter-
viewee found the starting date of the Roadmap problematic. It seemed as if 
the  Roadmap  ‘had’  been  published  as  close  as  possible  to  8th  March, 
International Women’s Day. While the reasons for this remain theoretical, 
we can extract from some interviews that International Women’s Day was a 
good publication date for the FEMM committee. The MEPs saw it as a fac-
tor for attracting public attention for the EP resolution, therefore it played 
a role in organising the institutional processes. In particular, interviewees 
from the EP pointed to the necessity of media attention, which could be 
more easily achieved around international days, dedicated to a topic.

When I am assigned a report or an opinion, it’s first of all to establish a calen-
dar and in that perspective, I get in contact with some interlocutors, I cannot 
draw up a calendar at my pleasure. (…). So, you negotiate already because 
(…) for example, if you know that around March you can adopt it, you would 
like to adopt it as closely as possible to the International Women’s Day to give it 
more visibility. (EP official 23:32)

But particularly in regard to gender equality policy (…) you need to support or 
find a spectacular case. Only that would help to make it a topic, to get media 
attention, to prepare in a way that everyone becomes sensitive to it (…). (MEP 
2:32)

The question of timing was also closely connected to the consequences 

of the budget and content of the Roadmap.

The Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment asked the other DGs to 
contribute to the Roadmap’s priority action areas. The DGs contributed 
the following (non-exclusive) list of programmes. The list and time spans 
explained  that  the  Roadmap’s  time  span  2006–2010  simply  did  not  fit 
with any of the planned programmes, as illustrated in Table 4.1.

4.4  ASYNCHRONOUS TIMING IMPEDING CONSISTENCY 

  193

Table 4.1  Policy programmes related to the Roadmap content

Programme name Adoption

Period

Policy field

Budget in €

PROGRESS
ESF
EFRE

FP 7

DAPHNE II
DAPHNE III

Lifelong Learning 
Programmeb 
“Investing in 
People”
Europe for Citizens 
Programme
Plan-D for 
Democracy, 
Dialogue and 
Debate
Programme of 
Community action 
in the field of 
public health I
Programme of 
Community action 
in the field of 
public health II
INTI-Programme

657,590,000a
24 October 2006 2007–2013 Employment
2007–2013 Employment
5 July 2006
Approx. 75 billion
2007–2013 Regional Policy Approx. 308,041 
5 July 2006

18 September 
2006
21 April 2004
25 September 
2007
15 November 
2006

2007–2013 Research

2004–2008 Justice
2007–2013 Justice

billion
50,521 million

50 million
11,685 million

2007–2013 Education

Approx. 7 billion

12 December 
2006
13 October 2005 n.a.

Communication –

2007–2013 Education

215 million

23 September 
2002

2003–2008 Health

312 million

23 October 2007 2008–2013 Health

321 million

n.d.

2003–2008 Education/ 
Employment

18 million 
(2003–2006)

Compilation by author
a12% dedicated to the gender equality strand
bSub-programmes Comenius, Erasmus, Leonardo da Vinci and Grundtvig

The overview reveals that the times varied greatly and that none of the 
programmes equalled the time span of the Roadmap; some started earlier 
and finished during the Roadmap, others started during the Roadmap time 
span. When policy programmes are adopted by the Council and EP their 
goals, budget for specific actions and the call for proposals are fixed. It is 
impossible to change the text, goals or budget afterwards. From evaluation 
studies of the European Social Fund we know that those  responsible for 

194 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

the implementation are reluctant to accept additional requirements if they 
are not written down in the formal decision. Many programmes included 
in the table above did not mention gender equality as one of their goals 
(Ahrens 2007). However, there was no explanation in the Roadmap on 
how the Commission would ensure that the programmes that had already 
started earlier would take the goals of the Roadmap into account. This was 
a fact that was mentioned by an EP official and a NGO representative:

You cannot say a Roadmap for equality 2006 and 2010 when you have already, 
for example, (…) the Gender Institute which was way before the Roadmap as a 
proposal. So you are integrating in the Roadmap things that have been decided 
previously, just to show that you are doing something. (EP official 23:78)

But, for example, I don’t know, this network on women in decision-making is 
specifically funded. But the big problem is all those programmes, because if they 
are already there, how can they change them and monitor them? They say the 
‘Citizens for Europe’ programme will contribute to this and that. But do the 
people who manage these programmes even know about this? (NGO represen-
tative 29:52)

As a consequence of the above programmes the Roadmap process was 
not used to set up a distinctive gender equality policy, since the Roadmap 
compiled existing activities. This was a challenge that diminished the pol-
icy implications of the Roadmap and was often criticised by a variety of 
actors.  Overall,  the  different  timings  of  policy  programmes  that  should 
have contributed to the Roadmap produced accountability problems.

4.5 

  conclusion

In  a  political  system  where  network  governance  and  policy-making 
through  networks  have  become  main  features,  we  need  to  understand 
how the rules and routines of various actors conflict with each other and 
lead to choices that in turn produce unintended and detrimental conse-
quences for EU gender equality policy-making. In the aftermath of the 
adopted Roadmap the responsible actors, the EP and the member states 
have found it difficult to handle the changes that the Roadmap has caused 
as a soft law. While preceding policy programmes required the adoption by 
the Council and the EP, gender equality policy-making has been quietly 
altered by the Commission. Both the EP and member states have strug-
gled with new routines in reaction to the Roadmap.

4.5  CONCLUSION 

  195

The visualisation of how actors perceived the drafting process of the 
Roadmap  helped  to  discover  these  differences  in  narratives  and  policy 
tools. The network maps also showed who was perceived as powerful and 
who played a major role for the individual interviewees in their routine 
processing of the Roadmap communication.

The actors’ interpretations of the Roadmap policy-making were shaped 
by the bounded knowledgeability and the person’s location in time and 
space.  The  need  to  redefine  one’s  individual  and  institutional  role  in 
policy- making  on  a  meso-level 
influenced  the  final  outcome  of 
Commission’s communications.

The specific function of the Roadmap as the overarching policy docu-
ment for EU gender equality policy conflicted with other routines of net-
work governance. For instance, actors had to adapt to differences between 
their usual roles in gender equality policy and their role in the Roadmap 
process. This in turn influenced whether they perceived the policy process 
positively or negatively. Moreover, the division of competencies often left 
actors dissatisfied. They expected that their proposals would be included, 
but faced the fact that the Commission side-lined them.

The range of programmes that had already started before the adoption 
of the Roadmap revealed that its time span did not fit in with any of the 
programmes.  Moreover,  these  programmes  rarely  took  gender  equality 
into account, let alone the goals of the Roadmap. Instead, the time spans 
varied greatly and there was no explanation in the Roadmap in terms of 
how the Commission would ensure reaching the goal of promoting gen-
der equality through on-going or not yet started programmes.

Overall,  four  factors  influenced  policy-making:  (1)  the  differences  in 
the actors’ collaboration on the Roadmap from the usual collaborations, 
particularly  regarding  policy  programmes;  (2)  the  time  and  location  of 
actors during the drafting process influenced their interpretation of the 
importance of the Roadmap; (3) the actors’ reaction to rules and routines 
determined the acceptance of divided competencies; (4) the asynchronous 
timing challenged the publishing and content of the Roadmap.

In the previous framework strategy and connected action programme 
one of the goals was collaboration with other external stakeholders to the 
Commission.  However,  the  decision  to  set  up  the  Roadmap  as  a 
Commission communication reduced the potential for action. In combi-
nation with the Commission rules and routines the set-up as a Commission 
communication limited the possibilities to involve external stakeholders in 
drafting  the  Roadmap  text.  Commission  officials  had  little  insight  into  

196 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

if and how civil society was organised. They only expected input from the 
European Women’s Lobby. In the Commission, only the Gender Equality 
Unit of DG Employment knew the extent to which external actors were 
involved  in  drafting  and  adopting  the  Roadmap.  Moreover,  the 
Commission used the rules as a justification to exclude other actors, such 
as the member states and Social Partners. Choosing this particular drafting 
process precluded the inclusion of actions that had to be negotiated with 
member states, Social Partners. or other stakeholders.

 
 1.  Network governance is closely related to the concept of multi-level gover-

notes

nance (MLG).

 2.  Informal policy networks are not necessarily hidden, yet rules for processes, 
membership and responsibilities are often not clearly defined. Informal policy 
networks include, for example, specific working groups or experts who discuss 
future legislation, policy programmes or comparable elements at the formal 
level. They often also include the participation of non-governmental actors, 
like interest or civil society organisations, Social Partners. or companies.

 3.  For  more  elaborated  discussions  of  QNA  please  check  Hollstein  (2011), 

Crossley (2010), Fuhse and Mützel (2011).

 4.  The network maps displayed are all exact reproductions of the paper network 
maps from the interviews. They were designed with the program EgoNet.QF.
 5.  The formal rules on mobility, the so-called rotation principle, stipulate an obli-
gation for the top management level (director general and above) to change 
to a new post after five years. Cf. Guidelines on Mobility, Communication to 
the Commission SEC (2002) 146 of 12th February 2002.

 6.  Interviewees often mentioned the previous Commissioners of DG Employment, 

Anna Diamantopoulou, and of DG Communication, Margot Wallström.

 7.  To illustrate possible fluctuations: one civil servant changed his/her hierar-
chical  level,  yet  was  aware  of  the  whole  policy- making  in  gender  equality 
policy for quite some time. Another member state representative who worked 
inside the Commission before the Roadmap was drafted, then moved to a 
new position at member state level with national responsibility for gender 
equality policy and was  subsequently involved in the drafting of the Roadmap 
through interinstitutional groups. A third person was responsible for gender 
equality before the Roadmap was drafted, before switching to a different, yet 
closely related policy area and was therefore still connected with the topic, 
although not originally responsible for gender equality policy.

 8.  At least this shows that equal opportunity policies (defined as non-discrimi-
nation and positive action) are firmly rooted in the Commission. Results still 
have to come, but a programme exists and even at the higher management 
levels they knew about it and felt committed.

  REFERENCES 

  197

  9.  Without  claiming  causality,  the  ‘European  Pact  for  Gender  Equality’ 
(adopted at the Spring Council on 23rd/24th March 2006) included the 
planned member state activities.

 10.  Subsidiarity has been one of the guiding principles of the EU since the 
Maastricht Treaty (1992). Accordingly, the EU may only act where action 
of individual countries would be insufficient.

 11.  Exemptions were the Social Partners who were allowed to set up agree-
ments via the social dialogue that can be adopted as EU directives in the 
follow-up.

 12.  The European Parliament and the Council can suggest to the Commission 

to propose new legislation.

 13.  For detailed descriptions of the policy- making process refer to Jørgensen 

et al. (2006), Richardson (2005, 2012), and Wallace et al. (2005).

 14.  Cf. Commission staff working document—Annex to the Communication 
from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
European  Economic  and  Social  committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions—A Roadmap for equality between women and men 2006–2010—
Impact assessment {COM (2006) 92 final} /SEC/2006/0275/, p. 16.

 15.  Shortly after the largest enlargement in the history of the EU in 2004, the 
EU faced a severe crisis in 2005 when the draft constitution in France and 
the Netherlands was rejected and the summit in Brussels ‘collapsed’ over 
the next budget.

 16.  Cf. Commission response to text adopted in plenary, SP(2007)2139/3, 

1st June 2007, p. 1.

 17.  Advisory  Committee  on  Equal  Opportunities  for  Women  and  Men, 
‘Opinion  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  the  forthcoming  Commission 
Communication on future developments for equality between women and 
men (Roadmap)’, November 2005, page 3, 16.

 18.  Cf.  Decision  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  amending 
Council Decision 2001/51/EC establishing a Programme relating to the 
Community  framework  strategy  on  gender  equality  and  Decision  No 
848/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council establish-
ing a Community action programme to promote organisations active at 
European  level  in  the  field  of  equality  between  men  and  women. 
2004/0194 (COD), Strasbourg, 7th September 2005.

references

Abels, Gabriele. 2016. Multi-Level Governance: Tailoring a ‘Favourite Coat’ to 
the  Needs  of  ‘Gender  Fashion’.  In  Gendering  European  Integration  Theory. 
Engaging New Dialogues, ed. Gabriele Abels and Heather MacRae, 99–121. 
Opladen, Berlin & Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.

198 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

Ahrens, Petra. 2007. Gleichstellungspolitik in der Europäischen Union. Expertise 

im Auftrag der Bundestagsfraktion DIE LINKE, ed. Berlin.

———. 2011. Gender Equality Policy Networks in the European Union and the 

Utility of Qualitative Network Analysis. BGSS Working Paper No. 04/2011.

Beyers, Jan, Rainer Eising, and William Maloney, eds. 2008. Special Issue: The 
Politics  of  Organised  Interests  in  Europe:  Lessons  from  EU  Studies  and 
Comparative Politics. West European Politics 31 (6): 1103–1128.

Bretherton,  Charlotte,  and  Liz  Sperling.  1996.  Women’s  Networks  and  the 
European Union: Towards an Inclusive Approach? Journal of Common Market 
Studies 4: 487–508.

Carrington, Peter J., John Scott, and Stanley Wasserman, eds. 2005. Models and 

Methods in Social Network Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Christiansen, Thomas, and Simona Piattoni, eds. 2004. Informal Governance and 

the European Union. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Crossley, Nick. 2010. The Social World of the Network. Combining Qualitative 
and  Quantitative  Elements  in  Social  Network  Analysis.  Sociologica  1/2010. 
doi:10.2383/32049.

Eising, Rainer, and Beate Kohler-Koch. 1999. Introduction: Network Governance 
in the European Union. In The Transformations of Governance in the European 
Union, ed. Beate Kohler-Koch and Rainer Eising, 3–13. London; New York: 
Routledge.

Fuhse,  Jan,  and  Sophie  Mützel.  2011.  Tackling  Connections,  Structure,  and 
Meaning in Networks: Quantitative and Qualitative Methods in Sociological 
Network Research. Quality and Quantity 45 (5): 1067–1089.

Hall,  Peter.  1987.  Interactionism  and  the  Study  of  Social  Organisation.  The 

Sociological Quarterly 28: 1–22.

Heinelt, Hubert, and Michèle Knodt. 2011. Conclusion. In Policies within the EU 
Multi-Level  System.  Instruments  and  Strategies  of  European  Governance, 
385–407. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Hix, Simon. 2006. The European Union as a Polity (I). In Handbook of European 
Union Politics, ed. Knud Erik Jørgensen, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben Rosamond, 
141–158. London; Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Hollstein,  Betina.  2011.  Qualitative  Approaches.  In  Sage  Handbook  of  Social 
Network Analysis, ed. John Scott and Peter J. Carrington, 404–417. London 
and New Delhi: Sage.

Hollstein, Betina, and Jürgen Pfeffer (2010), Netzwerkkarten als Instrument zur 
Erhebung egozentrierter Netzwerke. In Unsichere Zeiten. Verhandlungen des 
34. Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Soziologie, 6.-10. Oktober, Jena, ed. 
H.-G.  Soeffner.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag  für  Sozialwissenschaften.  Accessed 
March 6, 2017. http://www.pfeffer.at/egonet/Hollstein%20Pfeffer.pdf.

Hollstein,  Betina,  and  Florian  Straus,  eds.  2006.  Qualitative  Netzwerkanalyse: 
für 

Konzepte,  Methoden,  Anwendungen.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag 
Sozialwissenschaften.

  REFERENCES 

  199

Hooghe, Liesbet, and Gary Marks. 2001. Multi-Level Governance. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press.

Hoskyns, Catherine. 1996. Integrating Gender: Women, Law and Politics in the 

European Union. London: Verso.

———.  2008.  Governing  the  EU:  Gender  and  Macroeconomics.  In  Global 
Governance:  Feminist  Perspectives,  ed.  Shirin  Rai  and  Georgina  Waylen, 
107–128. Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Jansen,  Dorothea.  2006.  Einführung  in  die  Netzwerkanalyse:  Grundlagen, 

Methoden, Forschungsbeispiele. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Jørgensen, Knud Erik, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben Rosamond. 2006. Handbook of 

European Union Politics. London; Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Kahn, Robert L., and Toni C. Antonucci. 1980. Convoys Over the Life Course: 
Attachment,  Roles,  and  Social  Support.  In  Life-Span  Development  and 
Behaviour,  ed.  P.B.  Baltes  and  O.G.  Brim,  383–405.  New  York:  Academic 
Press.

Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy 

Networks in International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Kingdon, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston: Little, 

Brown and Company.

Klüver, Heike. 2012. Lobbying As a Collective Enterprise: Winners and Losers of 
Policy Formulation in the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy 
20 (1): 59–76.

———. 2014. Lobbying in the European Union: Interest Groups, Lobbying Coalitions 

and Policy Change. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lang, Sabine. 2009. Assessing Advocacy: Transnational Women’s Networks and 
Gender Mainstreaming in the European Union. Social Politics 16 (3): 327–357.
Locher,  Birgit.  2007.  Trafficking  in  Women  in  the  European  Union:  Norms, 
für 

Advocacy-Networks  and  Policy-Change.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag 
Sozialwissenschaften.

Mahoney,  Christine.  2007.  Networking  vs.  Allying:  The  Decision  of  Interest 
Groups to Join Coalitions in the US and the EU. Journal of European Public 
Policy 14 (2): 366–383.

———. 2008. Brussels Versus the Beltway: Advocacy in the United States and the 

European Union. Washington: Georgetown University Press.

Mazey,  Sonia.  1995.  The  Development  of  EU  Equality  Policie:  Bureaucratic 

Expansion on Behalf of Women? Public Administration 73 (4): 591–609.

Mazey, Sonia, and Jeremy Richardson. 2006. The Commission and the Lobby. In 
The European Commission, ed. David Spence, 279–290. London: John Harper 
Publishing.

Montoya,  Celeste.  2008.  The  European  Union,  Capacity  Building,  and 
Transnational  Networks:  Combating  Violence  Against  Women  Through  the 
Daphne Program. International Organization 62 (1): 359–372.

200 

4  NETWORK VOICES & GOVERNANCE CHARACTERISTICS

———. 2009. International Initiative and Domestic Reforms: European Union 
Efforts to Combat Violence Against Women. Politics & Gender 5 (3): 325–348.
Piattoni,  Simona.  2010.  The  Theory  of  Multi-Level  Governance:  Conceptual, 

Empirical, and Normative Challenges. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Prudovska,  Tetyana,  and  Myra  Max  Ferree.  2004.  Global  Activism  in  “Virtual 
Space”:  The  European  Women’s  Lobby  in  the  Network  of  Transnational 
Women’s NGOs on the Web. Social Politics 11 (1): 117–143.

Richardson, Jeremy. 2005. European Union: Power and Policy-Making. New York: 

Routledge.

———.,  ed.  2012.  Constructing  a  Policy-Making  State?  Policy  Dynamics  in  the 

European Union. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ruzza, Carlo. 2004. Europe and Civil Society: Movement Coalitions and European 

Governance. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Saurugger,  Sabine.  2014.  Theoretical  Approaches  to  European  Integration. 

Scott,  John,  and  Peter  Carrington,  eds.  2011.  The  SAGE  Handbook  of  Social 

Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Network Analysis. London: Sage.

Stephenson, Paul. 2013. Twenty Years of Multi-Level Governance: ‘Where Does 
It Come From? What Is It? Where Is It Going?’. Journal of European Public 
Policy 20 (6): 817–837.

Straßheim, Holger. 2011. Netzwerkpolitik: Governance und Wissen im administra-

tiven Austausch. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Strauss, Anselm. 1973. Social World Perspective. Studies in Symbolic Interaction 1: 

119–128.

University Press.

Tarrow, Sidney. 2005. The New Transnational Activism. Cambridge: Cambridge 

True,  Jaqui,  and  Michael  Mintrom.  2001.  Transnational  Networks  and  Policy 
Diffusion: The Case of Gender Mainstreaming. International Studies Quarterly 
45 (1): 27–57.

Van der Vleuten, Anna. 2007. The Price of Gender Equality: Member States and 

Governance in the European Union. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Wallace, Helen, William Wallace, and Mark A. Pollack. 2005. Policy-Making in the 

European Union. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wassermann, Stanley, and Katherine Faust. 1994. Social Network Analysis: Methods 
and  Applications  (Structural  Analysis  in  the  Social  Sciences).  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Woodward, Alison. 2003. European Gender Mainstreaming: Promises and Pitfalls 

of Transformative Policy. Review of Policy Research 20 (1): 65–88.

Woodward,  Alison  E.  2004.  Building  Velvet  Triangles:  Gender  and  Informal 
Governance.  In  Informal  Governance  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Thomas 
Christiansen, 76–93. Cheltenham: Elgar.

Zippel, Kathrin. 2004. Transnational Advocacy Networks and Policy Cycles in the 
European Union: The Case of Sexual Harassment. Social Politics 11 (1): 57–85.

CHAPTER 5

Roadmap to Nowhere: Institutional Erosion 

and a Collapsing Network

Whenever we talk about gender equality, they want to talk about 

achievements, they don’t want to talk about what more needs to be done.

(Interview with Commission Official)

How do adopted policies impact on the future of the policy area? What are 
the issues that are discussed? Will equality policies lead to greater gender 
equality? One way to answer these questions is by deciphering the differ-
ent perspectives and assessments of actors. Most of the research in equality 
policies stops with the adoption process, even though it is equally impor-
tant to assess what the policies’ real effects are (Mazur 2017). The above 
quotation  illustrates  a  common  problem  in  policy-making:  while  some 
actors  are  satisfied  with  policies,  others  criticise  the  outcome.  How  do 
actors judge gender equality? Does it depend on their position inside a 
specific institution? Does it make a difference if they perceive themselves 
as feminists or as civil servants with a particular portfolio? The Commission 
official who is quoted above illustrated their own position as torn between 
the internal logic of a policy area—by emphasising the achievements—and 
the external actors who are pressuring for more far-reaching policies. The 
Commission official understands both positions but is limited in their pos-
sibility to satisfy both expectations.

201

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4_5202 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

One  challenge  in  policy-making  research  is  the  identification  of  the 
implications  and  unintended  consequences  of  certain  policy  decisions; 
decisions that in the long run can result in a spill-over, as stipulated by 
classic  neo-functionalist  theory.  MacRae  (2010)  argued  that  especially 
supranational  gender  equality  policy  has  been  used  by  the  European 
Commission  to  justify  its  activities.  How  credible  is  this  self-portrayal 
when the policy implications are negative and when there is a spill-back 
(Schmitter 1970) instead of intensified integration? When do policies spill 
over?  When  do  they  become  deadlocked?  This  chapter  addresses  these 
questions by highlighting the unintended consequences of the Roadmap 
adoption. How did they come about and what does it mean for the whole 
policy field? The implications cannot be found on the policy content level 
only, but also in regard to other aspects, such as policy networks, resources, 
importance of policies in general and accountability.

If we want to improve policy-making we need to illuminate its inherent 
contradictions, the varied perspectives of its actors and its implications for 
the policies after adoption. This chapter analyses the short-term and long- 
term implications of the Roadmap as a soft law instrument. Policy instru-
ments  as  tools  of  (supranational)  governance  have  been  researched  for 
some time (Hood 1986; Hood and Margetts 2007; Peters et al. 1998; 
Salamon 2002). However, the focus was often limited to functional ques-
tions  (Kassim  and  Le  Galès  2010;  Lascoumes  and  Le  Galès  2007).  A 
recent sociological strand of instrument research suggests broadening and 
deepening the scope of enquiry by conceptualising instruments as institu-
tions and carefully examining the intended and unintended consequences 
of choosing a certain instrument, since ‘(e)very instrument constitutes a 
condensed form of knowledge about social control and ways of exercising 
it’ (Kassim and Le Galès 2010: 6). What were the consequences of adopt-
ing EU gender equality programmes through a Commission communica-
tion? How did the form affect every day working life, policy networks and 
the possible scope of future policies?

Overall,  the  actors’  constellations  and  gender  equality  policy-making 
routines evolved over time and led to short-term and long-term conse-
quences for gender equality policy-making on a supranational level. The 
decision to draft the Roadmap as a Commission communication reduced 
the  potential  for  promoting  a  range  of  other  activities.  It  denied  the 

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  203

opportunity  to  include  actions  that  had  to  be  negotiated  with  member 
states, Social Partners or other stakeholders.

The impact of policy programmes largely depends on the factual role 
that the programme plays for actors in the given policy area, as well as its 
scope and content. The quality of the Roadmap as a typical soft law tool 
deteriorated; so did the significance that actors attributed to the Roadmap. 
In the eyes of the actors the significance of the Roadmap was closely con-
nected with its role in the overall EU gender equality policy. In the long 
term the overall assessment of the Roadmap led to a split between actors 
and an erosion of the network—regardless of whether actors were satisfied 
with the drafting and adoption process or not.

Other studies have shown the effectiveness of soft law, as long as the 
mechanisms for implementation are working well and as long as there is 
accountability. Accountability, compulsory adoption and actor buy-in are 
important indicators for how firmly gender equality will be established. 
What seems like acceptable accountability for most of the Commission’s 
civil servants turned out to be the beginning of the end of gender equality 
networks. It also led to institutional erosion.

This chapter examines how actors talked about the Roadmap and their 

interactions with other actors in the priority action areas.

5.1 

  Short-term Policy imPlicationS of the Policy 

ProceSS

The policy process of the Roadmap had a direct effect on gender equality 
policy-making. The policy implication of the Roadmap was low, particu-
larly in comparison with the previous policy programmes and other con-
nected programmes, such as the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) in 
EU research policy. The Roadmap had limited accountability, it was not 
binding and the budget was unclear. The drafting process of the Roadmap 
moved  it  into  the  background  for  the  people  who  were  predominantly 
responsible for its implementation.

The budget was not only unknown, even the fact that there was no 
official  budget  was  forgotten.  Allocated  resources  provide  actors  with 
power and represent an important basis for producing social practices, so 
the policy implications of an unknown budget are immense.

204 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

5.1.1 

  Accountability and Compulsory Character

In terms of accountability and enforcement many external actors were dis-
satisfied with their exclusion from the drafting process which led to gen-
eral  criticism  of  EU  gender  equality  policy.  The  Roadmap  was  not 
automatically  included  in  the  actors’  narratives  when  they  talked  about 
gender equality policy. Whether the Roadmap was in the foreground or 
background of everyday work varied significantly among actors.

By using Commission communications as a legal instrument for gender 
equality  policy  programmes,  the  European  Commission  intended  to 
exclude  actions  that  involved  member  states,  Social  Partners  and  other 
stakeholders. This was consistent with the inherent logic of Commission 
communications, since they only concern actions of the Commission. In 
this occasion, however, the decision reversed the previous history of these 
policy  programmes—member  states  organisations,  Social  Partners  and 
women’s  organisations  were  already  used  to  supranational  projects  and 
had  to  adjust  to  the  new  set-up.  The  adjustment  was  not  necessary  in 
terms of the general content—all actors supported the six priority areas of 
action of the Roadmap:

But on an overall level, the priority fields chosen are very relevant. And if I 
would be asked to choose six priorities, it would be those. (NGO representative 
16:54)

The six areas identified in the Roadmap are often the subject of our reports, so 
there is wide support for these as the main areas in which gender equality can 
be advanced. (EP official 22:3)

It  is  good  to  have  a  Roadmap.  You  can  tell,  this  is  the  situation  and  the 
Roadmap says what we will give priority on this and this and this. In that way 
it’s good. I think we have chosen the best issues to start with. I have no different 
opinion. (MEP 3:88)

While  the  content  was  unquestioned,  a  variety  of  actors  extensively 
criticised  the  way  the  programme  was  implemented.  The  European 
Women’s Lobby, for example, struggled to gain access to the Interservice 
Group  on  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  claimed  that  the  policy  process, 
together  with  the  final  Roadmap  content,  caused  lower  accountability 
than any previous policy programme.

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  205

When  the  Roadmap  was  adopted  the  different  actors  within  the 
Commission  DGs  were  aware  of  their  commitments.  They  expected  the 
Gender Equality Unit to lead the implementation and, if necessary, remind 
everyone about their duties. These included which Commission actors had 
which obligations and, more precisely, what commitments were defined in 
the  content  of  the  Roadmap.  At  the  same  time,  member  states,  Social 
Partners  and  NGOs  were  still  searching  for  their  new  roles.  These  were, 
however, never assigned nor negotiated in the policy process. Excluded by 
the legal instrument and left with a supervisory role, the NGOs, trade unions 
and FEMM Committee mistrusted the accountability of the Roadmap.

The  lack  of  accountability  and  non-compulsory  character  of  the 
Roadmap was of concern to all gender equality actors. However, there was 
no unity. The question of whether it was good or bad that the Roadmap 
compiled existing policies rather than signposting new goals was contested. 
There was a clear split between Commission officials on the one hand and 
from NGO representatives and the EP’s left political spectrum on the other. 
The remaining actors, such as member states and expert group representa-
tives, were more widely distributed and less determined in their judgment.
In  the  interviews  three  different  criteria  emerged  for  measuring  the 
accountability  and  compulsory  character  of  the  Roadmap.  The  criteria 
were implicitly agreed but judged differently: (1) The necessity of legisla-
tive proposals and how they were forecast; (2) how the policy areas were 
compiled; (3) the hierarchical power of the Roadmap over the policy pro-
grammes for the promotion of gender equality.

In terms of these three criteria the actors judged the Roadmap’s com-
pulsory character as: (1) a good compilation with suitable accountability; 
(2) an acceptable compilation with fine accountability; or (3) a dissatisfac-
tory compilation, lacking accountability. The judgments were not simple 
statements; they had an impact on how the actors positioned themselves 
in relation to others, they steered the follow-up behaviour. The contrast-
ing perception of these crucial aspects had the unintended consequence of 
destroying the ties between Commission actors on the one hand and the 
FEMM Committee and the EWL on the other hand.

 Good Compilation and Suitable Accountability
EU policies are by definition directed to its member states. Consequently 
all policy actions of the Roadmap should ultimately have an effect in the 

206 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

member states. Surprisingly, the Roadmap had the adverse effect: member 
state representatives simply blocked out activities which were included in 
the  Roadmap  when  they  were  not  directly  mentioned.  The  decision  to 
limit the responsible actors for the Roadmap to Commission DGs and to 
compile existing programmes was considered appropriate by the majority 
of Commission officials and member state representatives. A Commission 
official explained the compilation with a reference to the treaties and what 
they allowed the Commission to do vis-à-vis the member states:

[The  Roadmap]  is  very  much  a  community  competence  and  we  are  in  the 
realm of shared competences in social affairs. And we’ve always got to make 
sure that all member states are going to agree. (Commission official 11:157)

The interviewees referred to divided competencies and subsidiarity as a 
reason for the selection of the content. Some member states saw the design 
of the Roadmap as a matter of making gender equality more accessible and 
visible to the rest of the world.

I think it is interesting that it is a good cosmetic aspect, but it’s important for 
the visibility. The fact that it is now called Roadmap for the future and it is in 
one document is a better way to sell gender equality policies and it is easier to 
refer to it than when it was in gender equality programmes. It’s much more 
simplified, rational, the fact that indicators are clearer … it looks as if it would 
be a global strategy even though it is not yet a global strategy, because there are 
a lot of missing fields, but it looks more like that. (Member state representative 
28:50)

The member state representative directly compared the Roadmap with 
the previous policy programme, which consisted of an action programme 
and the framework strategy. The main point for the member state repre-
sentative is the visibility of the Roadmap; the accountability is assigned to 
simplicity, rationality and clear indicators.

Commission officials also presented the compilation of existing activi-
ties as a way of simplifying gender equality policy; it was a concession that 
there would be no additional commitments to fulfil:

The Roadmap is more a reflection of what we do and what we intend to do. It 
was not the Roadmap that told us what we are going to do in the future, you 
know, it’s more, we have a series of commitments, we have a series of activities, 
so we put that in the Roadmap. So it was quite easy. It’s not that the Roadmap 

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  207

asks us to do something different, something more than what was planned. It … 
gives  coherence,  sets  priorities  but  it  doesn’t  introduce  new  elements. 
(Commission official 19:74)

The support for compiling existing policies explains why asynchronous 
timing  occurred  and  why  no  new  elements  were  set  up.  The  Gender 
Equality Unit of DG Employment hereby assured broad support for the 
Roadmap. This way conflicts that might have become virulent were avoided. 
Commission officials from other DGs acknowledged this strategic move:

My impression is that it’s not something that came out of the head of the people 
drafting the Roadmap and they imposed it on other DGs, but of course they 
built on already existing structures. (Commission official 1:182)

Surprisingly, the view that assuring support reflected the most impor-
tant step for accountability was not only provided by Commission offi-
cials; indeed, an MEP also talked about a similar aspect:

Of course, I can have my own proposals, but I think this [the Roadmap] is the 
best way because if you want to succeed you must have a lot of members to sup-
port it, and because of that I think this is the best way. I haven’t had any other 
proposal  because  I  realised  that  for  the  next  ten  years  perhaps  we  can  have 
another issue, but now it’s the best, for the time it’s the best. (MEP 3:90)

How ‘easy’ it was to implement the Roadmap in the Commission was 
already indicated by the fact that the final draft did not even make it to 
the  top  of  the  College  of  Commissioners’  agenda.  The  College  of 
Commissioners adopted the Roadmap communication without any fur-
ther discussion. The document was not in ‘oral procedure’, so it was not 
tabled or discussed. It was not an important item on the schedule of the 
Commissioners’  College  because  all  critical  points  were  erased  in 
advance.

One  cabinet  member  admitted  that  the  chef  de  cabinet  did  not  read 
every Commission proposal, only their own important ones—and those 
that could cause problems and conflicts between their DG and competing 
departments. A similar approach for legislative proposals has been noted 
by Hartlapp et al. (2013). The cabinet member also explained that the 
Roadmap was probably not noticed by her/him, because his/her assistant 
saw no problem. S/he followed an informal rule of agreeing to the pro-
posal when no problems were expected.

208 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

Some expressed the view that the Roadmap could very well function as a 
checklist—a working document where everyone knew what to do and when:

I think that is the big advantage of the Roadmap, this time it was quite on the 
point of education: this is the problem, this is what the Commission can do, it was 
very good. Immediately, you could work with this document. Before it was more a 
text, now it was a working document. Immediately you could see what is expected 
from whom. And this has some advantage. (Council representative 5:60)

Again,  the  Roadmap  was  compared  with  the  previous  policy  pro-
gramme, the framework strategy, which was perceived as a political docu-
ment that set the agenda and goals. The Council representative was able 
to  distinguish  what  is  expected  from  the  Commission  and  the  member 
states regarding gender equality policy, as s/he was aware of how the com-
petencies in the different policy areas were split. Where the Commission 
needed the member states’ approval, e.g. for the Structural Funds regula-
tions, the member states were mentioned. In reverse, member state repre-
sentatives might have simply blocked out the other activities because they 
were not directly mentioned. However, this seems to reflect paradoxical 
thinking, as—by definition—EU policies are directed to its member states 
and all policy actions of the Roadmap should ultimately have an effect in 
the member states.

 Acceptable Compilation and Fine Accountability
While the first group never challenged the procedures and the final prod-
uct of the Roadmap, the second group accepted the process and product 
more  in  the  context  in  which  it  was  set  up.  Consequently,  assessments 
were slightly more critical in terms of its accountability.

That is the problem with most of the points which are identified in the Roadmap. 
Apart from the first one, which is very concrete, even if it is quantitative and 
does not really make a huge difference in life. There might be some member 
states which improve, others not. But in general, the points are not something 
that people would disagree with … we need to achieve this. But in the action 
strategy it is saying yes, we will promote, promote, promote. And when it comes 
to actions and the assessment of achievements … on the other side, these are hard 
to measure and see how they are progressing. (NGO representative 16:86)

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  209

As the actors embraced the clear division of duties, the NGO represen-
tative was aware who would be responsible for which part. Contrary to the 
satisfied Council representative, the NGO representative questioned the 
accountability  and  suspected  that  the  supranational  effects  were  unpre-
dictable  and  would  depend  on  national  activities  and  preferences.  The 
interviewee also concluded that measuring the Roadmap’s achievement in 
terms of the elimination of gender inequalities was an unworkable idea.

The trade union representative was undetermined in his/her judgment 
of  the  Roadmap  and  combined  it  with  an  incident  from  the  drafting 
process:

We contributed to it in the consultation and one of the things we would have 
liked … was a stronger Roadmap with some kind of consequences to it. It didn’t 
happen. That’s how the Commission wanted it to be. And so that’s there. (Social 
partner representative 31:50)

They lobbied for ‘consequences’, such as quantifiable goals or sanctions 
for non-implementation that should have resulted from the activities, as 
stipulated in the Roadmap. S/he made clear that it was the Commission 
who decided to adopt a Roadmap communication that did not call for any 
other kind of sanctions for non-implementation. Nonetheless, the social 
partner representative also noted that adoption does not necessarily result 
in direct implementation; the adopted text was seen as an opportunity to 
reach their goals in the drafting process at a later stage:

You can try and play a role in influencing the follow-up to say: ‘Look, this works 
really well, but this isn’t so good. Your procedures are very complicated, your 
priorities maybe aren’t 100% accurate’. So you try and influence it in the pre- 
stages and then in the actual run-up and try to work with the people who are 
actually drafting the projects. (Social partner representative 31:112)

The trade union representative saw the opportunity to compensate fail-
ures in terms of accountability and was confident that the implementation 
process would leave room for adjustments at a later stage. Nevertheless, 
such  kind  of  ex-post-adjustment  would  only  be  possible  for  activities 
where  additional  actors  could  be  involved.  However,  all  activities  with 
Commission actors remained unaffected.

210 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

 Dissatisfactory Compilation and Lacking Accountability
Representatives from the member states, NGOs and the FEMM represen-
tative emphasised the critical voices about the actual accountability of the 
Roadmap and the EP resolution which specifically addressed these ques-
tions.1 They expressed dissatisfaction about compiling actions rather than 
designing something new, about missing sanctions and monitoring mech-
anisms. They concluded that the Roadmap lacked accountability. In their 
statements  they  often  said  that  they  particularly  missed  clearly  defined 
goals, concrete activities which were connected to the goals and tools to 
assess progress:

We need to have a Tableau de Bord or a Roadmap, which lists very carefully all 
actions to be done, and really to have something that can be evaluated, assessed, 
monitored. Because otherwise you don’t know what to do, you don’t know when 
you have to do it, and you cannot assess the improvement or the obstacles. We 
need to have something where the actions are really identified and monitored. 
(Member state representative 26:39)

The problem with the Roadmap is that … it’s not concrete. It’s a very good map, 
in the sense of where you are going, but it’s a bad map in saying how you should 
be going there. Where is the road that I have to choose? [It’s as] if I am a pilot 
and I don’t know what I have to put on my radar … So in that sense my prob-
lem with the Roadmap is that it’s a very good list of what are the topics that 
need to be raised. But it’s not ambitious on how we need to tackle this. (MEP 
24:30)

Interviewees  expressed  their  overall  agreement,  but  assessed  the 
Roadmap negatively. They also criticised the missing compulsory charac-
ter  of  gender  mainstreaming  in  other  soft  law  processes.  They  saw  the 
failed connection of the Roadmap with these soft law processes:

One thing I really regret very much is the fact that if you look at the European 
employment strategy, open methods of coordination, and all the fields that are 
covered by the open methods of coordination, research and development, Bologna 
process,  social  protection,  and  so  on,  all  these  processes  have  a  strong  gender 
dimension and I really regret that the Roadmap has not taken this as a basis to 
implement  gender  policies  in  all  these.  So  we  have  a  Roadmap  which  is  less 
strong than the others and that doesn’t get into the others to implement gender 
policies. That’s one thing I really regret. And there are no connections between 
all these processes. (Member state representative 28:232)

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  211

The member state representative described the power relations between 
gender  equality  and  other  policy  areas  by  referring  to  the  other  policy 
processes  and  the  limited  compulsory  character  of  the  Roadmap.  This 
pointed to the challenges of the gender mainstreaming implementation—
similar to the problem of pilot projects getting from the initial stage with 
best practice to a lasting standard use (Ahrens and Lewalter 2005).

An  MEP  interpreted  the  way  in  which  goals  and  action  plans  were 
expressed in the Roadmap as problematic and a sign for missing account-
ability and the limited compulsory character:

In  general  the  attitude  is  what  you  do  …  recommendations  …  but  you  are 
vague. So it is a way to save your soul, but without having a binding commit-
ment. And this is what I feel about the Roadmap. Of course I am in favour of 
women’s economic independence, of course I am in favour of putting gender 
issues in the development programme, of course I am in favour of [more women 
in] decision making, but I mean if you only show good intentions this is not 
enough. (MEP 10:4)

The MEP described a form of euphemism or avoidance of binding com-
mitments. The policy areas in the Roadmap were adequate, but the conse-
quences were not. There were recommendations for adequate actions, but 
no specific, measurable steps to eliminate inequalities. Recommendations 
give  the  impression  that  the  problem  will  be  tackled.  When  there  is  no 
obligation it is left open whether the problem will be approached or solved. 
Therefore, the Commission euphemised the compulsory character of the 
Roadmap; there were hardly any strict obligations, only ‘good intentions’.
An EP official provided a similar, drastic judgment of the Roadmap as 
a harmless communication. S/he described the Roadmap as a ‘reheated 
soup’ without ‘added value’.

You could say it’s a ‘reheated soup’. (…) There is no added value in the way it 
is expressed. We should guarantee the economic independence of women. (…) 
We should do it [gender equality policy] in Third World countries. Great, I am 
very happy. Have you a proposal ready on the gender impact assessment on the 
development programmes? No? So what have you been talking about? (…) We 
made an exercise with a gender mainstreaming teacher here, taking the annex 
of the Roadmap to see what was feasible or not. Most of them were not feasible. 
Not feasible because they don’t have the knowledge. And they don’t have the 
resources to pool the knowledge. And they cannot rely on the Gender Institute. 
(…) So, what is left for DG Employment—except a Roadmap that does not 
harm anyone? (EP official 23:74, 96–98)

212 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

The EP official explained that the proposed steps in the Roadmap lacked 
a  consistent  translation  into  reliable  and  feasible  implementation.  From 
his/her perspective, many proposals were too broad and ideas and tools for 
their implementation were not available due to missing resources. Such a 
gap between the goals, actions, tools and resources and their actual imple-
mentation  can  only  be  described  as  window-dressing.  The  Commission 
covered a broad range of issues that gave the impression of targeted activi-
ties, yet there was hardly any consistency in the implementation.

The criticism of the Roadmap even turned into a general critique of EU 
gender equality policy. An expert group representative was annoyed that 
gender equality policy merely consisted of listing endless problems with-
out discussing the existing tools to tackle gender inequalities (Interview 
9).  S/he  particularly  criticised  the  lack  of  open,  conflictual  discussions 
about  policy  goals  and  policy  priorities  among  actors  and  about  some 
standard understanding of gender equality in the EU.

Even though actors supported the overall content, the majority became 
confused by the way in which the Roadmap was compiled. The confusion 
was caused by the compilation of activities that already existed or were part 
of  other  programmes.  Nonetheless,  such  confusion  should  not  be  mis-
taken as a criticism of the policy issues or the Roadmap’s outline.

The way in which activities were compiled led to confusion and criti-
cism from several sides. Even officials from the Commission’s Interservice 
Group on gender equality, who were truly engaged, had problems defin-
ing  the  action  priorities  (Interview  32).  They  often  had  to  check  the 
Roadmap document2 to name the location of their projects (Interview 25) 
or they stated that their project was included, albeit under a completely 
wrong heading (Interview 12).

For non-Commission actors, the compilation was also confusing and 
disappointing; they either did not know which DG contributed to which 
part or concluded that no new activities were stipulated:

The Roadmap is a symbolic act because the Roadmap in itself is not giving 
anything new …—I don’t know. But it was given to us as new. This database 
on women in decision-making existed way before 2006 by the way. (EP official 
23:126)

The problem is how the Commission then decided to tackle this. Because in many 
instances it’s using existing programmes or existing funding, there is no specific 

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  213

funding provided for it. And then … using programmes that exist already, so 
that it is difficult to see how that coordination will be made, especially if it is an 
existing programme, and especially if it is managed at the national level. So it 
has very big objectives and a good analysis, but the means to really do something 
are sometimes really modest in relation to what seems to be the intention. (NGO 
representative 29:44)

In general, actors were convinced that the pure compilation of existing 
programmes and activities indicated that the Roadmap was not binding 
and  innovative.  This  was  a  novelty  for  EU  gender  equality  policy  pro-
grammes, according to a member state representative:

When you had the previous programmes, it was not very ambitious, not very 
new, but at the same time you had very important improvements towards the 
European legislation. But now, that’s not the case anymore. So one could have 
hoped  that  the  Roadmap  would  have  been  a  really  ambitious  thing,  but  it 
wasn’t. (Member state representative 28:54)

Regardless of how external actors judged the compulsory character of 
the  Roadmap,  the  pivotal  question  was  how  the  Commission  officials 
themselves perceived their obligations in the Roadmap. To some extent, 
the  narratives  of  the  Commission  officials  confirm  the  anxieties  of  the 
external actors about the Roadmap’s lack of accountability:

Q: Maybe I misunderstand, but I thought when you oblige yourself to do that in 
the Roadmap, how can you get out of that?
A:  That  is  a  very  good  question.  Two  things:  first  of  all,  the  Roadmap  is  a 
framework, but we actually do our own agenda. This is basically the communi-
cation.3 And the communication fits into the Roadmap, but even if there was 
no Roadmap, we would have done the communication. Or, I hope so. So, it is a 
tricky thing, because it looks like we do what we do because there is a Roadmap. 
But I think that you can turn it around and say that the Roadmap is like that 
because DG Employment looked at who is doing what and they knew already at 
that time that we are doing this communication. Does that make sense?
Q: Yes, sure.
A: The second one, probably even more surprising. How is it possible that we 
have a communication that contains obligations, and then we don’t implement 
them? I mean, the Roadmap itself is also a communication, so legally it’s oblig-
atory for the Commission, and then we don’t do anything. Well, it happens very 
often! (Commission official 1:53–55)

214 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

Consequently,  asynchronous  timing  inside  the  Commission  between 
gender equality policy and other policy areas challenged the Roadmap’s 
binding and relevance. The moment the Roadmap communication was 
adopted  and  the  formal  implementation  started,  external  actors  to  the 
Commission were rarely able to control and monitor progress in detail. 
Instead, they had to rely on the annual working programme or the mid- 
term progress report which was compiled by the Gender Equality Unit of 
DG  Employment.4  One  of  the  informal  routines  of  the  Commission 
apparently included foregoing obligations, provided that no external actor 
asked or complained; a habit that was confirmed by the same Commission 
official:

[internal sanction mechanism]. There’s a complete lack of accountability. It’s 
strange, but we are working like this. I tell you, because many people know it, I 
think that the NGO people, they also know this. (Commission official 1:59)

In the 2007 EP resolution the FEMM Committee criticised the absence 
of  any  evaluation  of  the  previous  action  programmes.  This  would  be 
required  to  prove  that  the  Roadmap  challenged  the  correct  areas  and 
appropriately tackled the defined problems. Yet, this criticism did not have 
any impact on the Roadmap any more. In other words, monitoring often 
happened at a time when it was too late to change the next document. The 
content of the EP resolution on the Roadmap provided a good example in 
this respect.

The  Roadmap  listed  gender  action  plans  in  the  Seventh  Framework 
Programme (FP 7) as the EU tool to promote gender equality in research 
policy.5 However, the gender action plans were turned into voluntary ele-
ments  in  FP  7,  despite  their  obligatory  character  in  the  Roadmap.  A 
Commission official explained this by stating that FP 7 had a higher hier-
archical power than the Roadmap and that the DG decided to abandon 
them  for  various  reasons  (Interview  4).  This  means  that  the  Gender 
Equality Unit of DG Employment had no power to enforce the imple-
mentation of the Roadmap regarding gender action plans.

5.1.2 

  The Roadmap as Foreground or Background in Everyday 

Working Life

Was the Roadmap in the foreground or background of the working life of 
(supra)national actors? The answer is indicative for the impact of EU soft 

5.1  SHORT-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  215

law in general. The analysis of whether the Roadmap was important to the 
interviewees’ working lives includes the national and supranational levels. 
The foreground/background distinction was tied to different (geographi-
cal) spaces with opposite perceptions by the supranational level on the one 
hand and the national level on the other. In other words, while the people 
on the national level frequently referred to the Roadmap, the interviewees 
on the supranational level did rarely mention it.

Unexpectedly, almost none of the interviewees on the supranational 
institutions and organisations mentioned the Roadmap.6 The Roadmap 
was not part of the narratives about their daily work, it was in the back-
ground.  By  contrast,  almost  everyone  provided  broad  descriptions  on 
elements,  such  as  administrative  duties,  exchange  with  colleagues, 
screening  and  distributing  information,  lobbying  or  being  lobbied, 
meetings, presentations, plenary or committee sittings, writing briefings 
or  policy  papers;  i.e.  tasks  regarding  other  policy  issues.7  During  the 
investigation interviewees almost forgot about the Roadmap’s existence 
as part of their everyday work, except when they were working on one of 
the  main  topics,  when  they  were  in  a  leading  position  in  the  FEMM 
Committee, when they worked on the topic of the Roadmap for a NGO 
or one of the Social Partners. The Roadmap was placed in the foreground 
when interviewees were asked about their institution’s participation in 
the drafting and/or implementation of the Roadmap or in EU gender 
equality policy in general.

It’s not to say that the Roadmap is not important, because it is important. And 
it’s really a benchmark for us, because we do this reporting every year, and then 
we can see what we did. But actually we do our external reporting anyway 
every year. (Commission official 1:182)

Surprisingly, interviewees immediately put the Roadmap in the fore-
ground  when  they  described  the  policy  programme  as  a  tool  for 
 implementing EU policies at a national level (Interview 15 and inter-
view 27). The Roadmap was often seen as a simple tool to motivate the 
member  states  or  to  support  raising  awareness  for  gender  equality 
policy:

Actually all these action plans are nothing else than a tool to drag this topic 
back into consciousness, to enervate the member states in order to get them actu-
ally moving and do something. (MEP 2:30)

216 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

So basically, whenever we put a policy recommendation or position forward, we 
also include the gender perspective, to remind people that actually there is gen-
der equality, there is the Roadmap to follow. (NGO representative 16:34)

The Roadmap as a point of reference was acknowledged as a tool for 
the communication between the Commission, Council and EP. It was also 
seen as a tool for running top-level discussions and broadcasting gender 
equality policies in their own institutions:

Mr. Barroso and Mr Špidla and we [the FEMM Committee] always talk about 
the Roadmap. (…) And we can use the Roadmap when we have discussions in 
our group, we can refer to the Roadmap. Because as I said before, our group has 
given priority to women’s rights, so we are the members, they realise that we are 
doing the best we can, so they very often say: ‘It’s ok, go on’. (MEP 3:65;94)

The notion that the Roadmap was indeed an important point of refer-
ence in several member states can be derived from the statements of the 
Social Partners and MEPs who mentioned the Roadmap as the dominant 
document.

I think the existing complementary strategy is extremely important, that the 
two  complement  each  other,  on  the  one  hand  the  practical  measures  imple-
mented by the social partners, and on the other hand the policies on EU level. 
(Social partner representative 15:22)

Just to try and make progress in a number of areas, there’s an overlap between 
what’s said in the Roadmap—and that’s kind of calling on a national level to 
do stuff—and the social partners that are feeding into that via the framework 
of actions to try and make progress at company level, at workplace level etc. 
(Social partner representative 31:20)

… we took the proposal and we had a debate in [city name], coinciding with the 
annual  [party  name]  meeting  (…).  And  there  we  had  a  specific  debate  on 
what specific points we considered crucial, and what we needed. (MEP 24:59)

The function of the Roadmap was the dummy for EU gender equality 
policy. This is confirmed by the analysis of national references to EU gen-
der equality policy which was often combined with the Structural Funds. 
The Roadmap was cited as ‘the’ point of reference, the benchmark for EU 

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  217

gender equality policy. It was uploaded and promoted on several websites 
and  quoted  in  central  documents  of  national  authorities,  e.g.  by  the 
National Council of Women of Malta, the project Gender4Growth within 
the Interregional Cooperation Programme INTERREG IVC, the Agency 
for Gender Equality within the ESF, Germany, by the Northern Ireland 
European Social Fund Programme 2007–2013 and by Hungarian govern-
ing  authorities  for  the  EU  programme  EQUAL.8  Such  references  indi-
cated that the Roadmap was important to the national level and women’s 
or gender equality organisations in the member states, even though the 
Roadmap was less visible at the supranational level.

The fact that the Roadmap was placed into the background in everyday 
work sometimes caused a shift to other tools; a shift that did not exist dur-
ing the previous policy and action programme, the framework strategy.

In our work, we know there’s a Roadmap, we know what the priorities are in it 
but we don’t work on the Roadmap on a day-to-day basis and we’re using our 
own  instruments  to  try  and  strengthen  gender  equality,  whereas  before  we 
worked very much in line with the framework [strategy]. (Social partner rep-
resentative 31:76)

This means that the change in the actors who were involved in drafting 
and  implementing  the  Roadmap  had  the  unintended  consequence  that 
the policy programme became less visible in the everyday work of those 
who were working on EU gender equality policy. The Roadmap slid into 
the background at the supranational level, while activities at the national 
level still relied on the Roadmap policy programme, as if it had the same 
function as the previous framework strategy.

5.2 

  long-term Policy imPlicationS of the Policy 

ProceSS

The Roadmap fundamentally changed gender equality policy-making and 
had severe long-term effects for the policy area.

First, the Roadmap is the first ever gender equality policy programme 
without its own action programme and—even more importantly—a clearly 
defined  budget.  Instead,  different  Community  programmes,  such  as 
PROGRESS or DAPHNE or the structural funds, were supposed to pro-
vide  the  necessary  resources.  Such  a  broad  distribution  made  it  almost 

218 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

impossible to follow up expenditures for any gender equality actor, even 
for MEPs. Budget issues became further complicated by the fact that the 
Commission’s  actor  in  charge—the  Gender  Equality  Unit  of  DG 
Employment—had almost no opportunity to control the correct expendi-
ture of the budget which was assigned to the Roadmap. Second, the over-
all assessment of the Roadmap led to a split between the actors, regardless 
of whether they were satisfied with the drafting and adoption policy pro-
cess or not.

5.2.1 

  The (Unknown) Budget

Budget concerns are a central feature of politics. The expenditure on dif-
ferent policy areas demonstrates the overall priorities of a political system 
and its governing actors. The EU budget is particularly complex, as the 
EU does not have any tax authority itself; it relies on member states’ rev-
enues which are calculated via a complicated system.9 The Commission 
proposes the annual budget, which is subsequently amended and adopted 
by the Council and the European Parliament.10

The EU budget plan is called the ‘multi-annual financial framework’11 
and  defines  maximum  spending  for  different  priorities  for  a  seven-year 
period.  For  the  time  span  2007–2013  the  priorities  were  harnessing 
European  economic  growth  and  sustainable  growth,  strengthening 
European citizenship and developing a coherent role for Europe on the 
global stage.12

Policies  need  resources  for  implementation;  this  is  a  crucial  point  of 
which everyone is aware. Therefore, comments on the Roadmap budget 
fit  into  the  general  concerns  about  budget  and  resources.  Interviewees 
raised concerns that a limited, reduced or unavailable budget was a sign of 
opposition and signified a lack of support for gender equality policy.

The rules for financial management, control standards and the account-
ing system are proposed, negotiated and controlled by DG Budget. The 
functioning of the Commission budget management was known by the 
majority  of  the  Commission  officials,  some  of  whom  linked  their  com-
ments to the formal rules and their influence on planned expenditure or 
the role of DG Budget.

Surprisingly, the majority of actors—regardless of the institution—were 
unable to estimate the budget for the Roadmap. During the interviews 
this question almost always caused consternation and the answers switched 
between considering and underplaying the role of the budget:

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  219

Q: Do you know anything about the budget of the Roadmap?
A: No, because even in general … I just did not know so much about it. But not 
that I am aware of anything. I’m not even sure that there is specific gender 
budgeting inside the Commission. (…) But that would be another gap, if one is 
to look at it. (…) I did not think of that point. (NGO representative 16:96)

It was astonishing to hear that many actors did not even care how much 
money was allocated for gender equality in the Roadmap. Such disinterest 
would be understandable if the interviewee was not responsible for gender 
equality;  however,  quite  the  opposite  was  true.  Most  were  uninformed 
about the budget or made false assumptions:

Q: You would say that the specific budget in PROGRESS is comparable to the 
former action programme.
A: Yes. So basically, we have said the same. I mean, we have not said it in the 
Roadmap, but it is clear, because there is a programme, there is PROGRESS. And 
it’s clear, that the money that goes to gender equality for this unit and this spe-
cific budget, but not for mainstreaming. And I know that there is the kind of 
very complex structure to measure the implementation of PROGRESS, includ-
ing mainstreaming activities… Of course, every DG should be able to say how 
much money … I know for instance if you ask the DG AIDCO or Development, 
they have a budget on specific projects, because they use the OECD gender mac-
ros. (Commission official 6:265)

The RELEX family and DG Research, did not have a problem in nam-
ing their expenditure, regardless of whether it concerned specific actions 
or gender mainstreaming. According to civil servants the RELEX family 
spent  around  8  million  Euros  per  year  for  specific  actions  in  the  10th 
European Development Fund. Gender mainstreaming estimated another 
10 billion Euros per year. The sum was calculated with the OECD score-
board  with  one-third  of  all  financed  projects  as  so-called  level  1  and 
another third of projects as level 2. Level 1 means that gender equality was 
seen as one objective among a collection of others; Level 2 means that 
gender equality was seen as a primary objective. More money was spent via 
the programme ‘Investing in People’. DG Research estimated the gender 
equality budget as roughly 5–6 Million Euros per year for specific actions 
and more resources via gender mainstreaming activities by other units in 
social  sciences  and  humanities.  However,  no  estimate  was  available  in 
2008. This calculation contradicted the statements of other DGs, where 
Commission officials insisted that it was not possible to estimate the  overall 

220 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

expenditure.  Sophie  Jacquot  calculated  that  ‘[w]hereas  in  1990  all  the 
funds devoted to gender equality were channelled to the social domain, 15 
years later this share has fallen to less than 50 per cent.’ (Jacquot 2010: 
127).

Other interviewees explained that budget discussions caused conflicts, 
sometimes due to the difficulties in estimating the sum when it came to 
gender mainstreaming, as opposed to specific actions for women or men:

You are also interested in resources? Budget? No budget. (…) Yes, but I mean 
the programmes, you know, when you touch the money … gender concerns—it’s 
more like salt and pepper, it’s not what you eat, it’s the flavour of what you eat 
(…) So there’s no separate gender budget—it’s a hot issue. (…) But they cannot 
say, ok, on this programme for so many millions of Euros and there are 150.000 
Euros which are mine. This is impossible. Mainstreaming is taken into consid-
eration  not  substituted.  So,  we  actually  harvest  quite  a  number  of  projects 
which are definitely relevant in terms of fighting illiteracy, women with chil-
dren, migrants … gender stereotypes. (Commission official 25:77)

The Commission official explained that the Commission sets up a pro-
gramme or project which focuses on a particular topic, such as fighting 
illiteracy  or  combating  human  trafficking.  Promoting  gender  equality 
would be one of the objectives in such a context; the ‘salt and pepper’ 
rather than the main objective. The substitution approach was obviously 
debated, which was ‘a hot issue’ and caused problems in terms of how 
much money should be spent on promoting gender equality.

The Commission’s corruption scandal in 1999 caused changes to the inter-
nal budget procedures. This often resulted in combining programmes that 
had previously been separate, as in the case of PROGRESS13 (Interview 11).
It was puzzling to see that the consciousness about the missing alloca-
tion disappeared the moment it was decoupled from an action programme. 
As long as there was an action programme, people were able to ask about 
the  budget.  By  contrast,  without  a  specific  gender  equality  action  pro-
gramme budget questions were dropped, particularly because programmes 
were not assigned to the FEMM Committee as a primary responsibility. 
They rather fell under the responsibility of other committees for corre-
sponding  programmes;  e.g.  PROGRESS  was  the  responsibility  of  the 
Employment  and  Social  Affairs  Committee.  NGO  representatives  con-
firmed this effect for EU policy areas in general:

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  221

I really can’t tell you more on that because it’s not an area of our work and, 
unfortunately, you will find in Brussels that there’s so much to follow that you 
need to stick to the areas that your working group is working on. (NGO repre-
sentative 18:36)

The  consequences  of  an  unknown  budget  are  subtle.  If  you  do  not 
assign an action programme and state that policies will be financed by vari-
ous budget lines instead, people stop asking about it. A diminished budget 
can be interpreted as a way of avoiding control or switching the attention 
to the content. However, what is the content without resources? If you 
allocate a clear budget, people will ask whether you spent it. If you leave a 
blank, people will probably notice, yet if you mention various programmes, 
people will forget about it. Even though the Gender Equality Unit did not 
do  it  on  purpose,  the  missing  budget  ultimately  weakened  the 
programme.

 Control over the Budget in the Commission
The Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment claimed to have a budget 
line, although they could not control it immediately, they needed to con-
tact their colleagues.14 As long as they were responsible for the previous 
action  programme,  they  entirely  controlled  the  expenditure  and  alloca-
tion. When examining the documents of the PROGRESS programme, the 
lack of control became evident. The budget for the gender equality policy 
area was 12% of the overall budget.15 In 2008, the specific gender branch 
in PROGRESS only amounted to 9%; the missing three percentage points 
shifted  to  the  other  policy  areas.  One  EP  official  was  convinced  that  it 
would be impossible to reach the average earmarked 12% of the budget as 
there had already been a large gap from the start. In reverse, the other 
policy areas would have had to shift parts of their budget in the remaining 
years to close the gap; something that was considered unrealistic (Interview 
23). The 2012 analysis of the PROGRESS implementation is revealing. 
Even though the planned share of commitments for gender equality had 
been raised above 13% since 2011, the actual expenditure was alarmingly 
low. The gap between plans and actual expenditure almost only occurred 
for gender equality.16 Commission officials were aware about the risk that 
the PROGRESS budget for gender equality could be shifted to the other 
four policy areas:

222 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

Q: Does it make a difference that you don’t have a specific action programme, 
but it’s integrated into other programmes?
A: What do you mean? I don’t know in terms of management how the differ-
ence is made. I don’t think that for the outside or for the action … It is so dif-
ferent. Apart from the fact that in PROGRESS you can always move on from 
the inside. So, if you don’t spend your whole money on gender, which is sort of the 
budget for gender equality, it will go to the strand for persons with disabilities 
or to others who’ve got better proposals. So, it’s a question of how proactive the 
Unit dealing with gender equality is and how they sort of make sure they spend 
their money. (Commission official 11:49–50)

Interestingly, important gender equality actors, such as the European 
Women’s  Lobby  and  the  FEMM  Committee,  did  not  know  that  the 
PROGRESS budget for gender equality was not exploited at the time 
of  the  interviews.  The  reason  for  their  lack  of  information  is  due  to 
their limited knowledge about things that happened under the supervi-
sion  of  actors  who  were  not  usually  involved  in  EU  gender  equality 
policy. The responsibility for PROGRESS in the EP was located in the 
Committee on Employment and Social Affairs (EMPL), while the pre-
vious action programme on gender equality fell within the responsibil-
ity of the FEMM Committee. By moving the budget from the Gender 
Equality Unit to the control of another in DG Employment and from 
the FEMM Committee to the EMPL Committee, the time and effort 
needed in order to access those in charge of PROGRESS increased for 
all gender equality policy actors. The Gender Equality Unit could not 
simply contact the FEMM Committee; they had to take the indirect 
route via their colleagues in charge of PROGRESS, and direct access to 
an  EP  committee  was  limited.  On  the  other  hand,  the  FEMM 
Committee had to take the indirect route via the EMPL Committee. 
They  did  not  usually  have  direct  contact  with  the  DG  Employment 
Unit in charge of PROGRESS. Indeed, member state representatives 
in charge of gender equality faced a similar challenge with PROGRESS, 
as  it  was  located  with  their  colleagues  in  a  different  ministry  (e.g. 
employment  instead  of  women’s  policy).  NGOs,  such  as  the  EWL, 
would have to develop new contacts at the cost of their usual ones. The 
FEMM Committee was aware that they would lose power and access 
when  the  gender  equality  action  programme  was  merged  into 
PROGRESS. However, they lacked the power to enforce their position 
inside the EP (Klein 2006: 92f).

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  223

Another  problem  occurred  when  the  programmes  and  subsequent 
budget lines of other DGs did not fit the same time span as the Roadmap. 
Nevertheless, DG Research and the RELEX family stated that they exerted 
direct control over their budget.

The Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment justified the abolish-
ment of the specific gender equality action programme with greater visibil-
ity of all financial instruments:

It is very difficult to give an estimate. I don’t have the numbers for PROGRESS, 
because there you can really define what we, as a unit, dedicate to gender equal-
ity. But this is a very small part of what is dedicated to gender equality, because 
to that you should add what is used in the structural funds, in the European 
Social Fund, what is used in the DG Development, in DG Research, in all DGs. 
And we are talking about specific measures. If you want to take into account 
gender mainstreaming, it’s really … it’s very difficult. (…) But there was a 
decision  not  to  announce  an  amount  as  before.  (Commission  official 
6:241–245)

The Commission official claimed that the clear budget for the previous 
framework strategy and its action programme had hidden the contribution 
of the various DGs, whereas the Roadmap would provide more visibility 
by listing the policy programmes instead of a specific budget. This reflects 
a way of delegating responsibilities and showcasing gender mainstreaming 
implementation. In addition, this explanation was contradicted by a social 
partner  representative  who  stated  that  the  original  idea  of  the  Gender 
Equality Unit was to keep their own action programme. The management 
of  DG  Employment  apparently  decided  to  merge  the  gender  equality 
action programme with others into PROGRESS and the Gender Equality 
Unit was not powerful enough to enforce their preferences:

We  have  a  very  good  contact  with  the  person,  one  of  the  people  in  the 
Commissioner’s office in charge of this. But to a certain extent her hands were 
tied, so on budgetary issues she also wanted to have a strong budget. She couldn’t. 
It wasn’t her decision but it was … So, there were also people involved in the 
process who would have liked it to be stronger. But ok, they operate within a 
regime where they also have constraints. (Social partner representative 31:106)

The budget narratives show that the Gender Equality Policy Unit in 
DG  Employment  lost  power.  They  might  have  wanted  an  action  pro-
gramme, but did not have the power to enforce their interests. In their 

224 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

narratives they described their defeat as a deliberate decision. The neces-
sity of rationalising, merging and streamlining the administration by elimi-
nating  specialised  programmes  or  combining  them  was  a  recurring 
narrative of Commission officials.

Another Commission representative developed a similar explanation on 
why budget estimates were difficult. In their policy area they supported 
projects and the money was not allocated because of the Roadmap, but 
because  it  was  logical  to  include  gender  aspects.  This  means  that  they 
would  be  able  to  announce  how  much  money  they  invested  in  gender 
equality after the policy implementation, although they could not do so in 
advance. The financial management rules did not allow the allocation of 
specialised  funds  in  advance  if  the  overall  topic  of  the  policy  area  con-
cerned a different topic:

Well, if I speak from with the book of law in my hand, all of them [include 
gender aspects] of course. All of them, why? We are under strict obligation not 
to help out discriminatory proposals. So if we see something—rugby men against 
women, faggots and other monsters—this will certainly not work? You see what 
I mean? That’s one thing. The second thing is that the Roadmap is relevant for 
us only through one or two topics, which are very nebulous … the fight against 
stereotypes.  Usually  we  don’t  have  a  project  called  ‘Fighting  Gender  Based 
Stereotypes—150.000 €’ … and then you say oh, yeah, right. Because we have a 
lot of cross-cutting projects which could be interpreted and then you have to see 
what’s happening (…) there’s a problem of monitoring the results. It could be 
interpreted as being relevant for women. (Commission official 25:73)

The Commission official spoke about his/her institution and explained 
why institutional rules forbid him/her to establish certain projects even 
though s/he would have wanted to change the routines and rules. The 
interviewee elaborated more on the challenges of convincing colleagues of 
the necessity to take a gender perspective into account and to re-adjust 
projects. S/he was convinced that more should be done in terms of proj-
ects and that the processes easily allowed some projects to reproduce gen-
der stereotypes instead of questioning them.

For those not working inside the Commission, the missing action pro-
gramme was either not acknowledged at all or was not seen as a problem. 
Others interpreted the uncertain budget as a sign of vague goals, missing 
priorities  and  lack  of  accountability.  Without  a  specified  budget,  it  was 

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  225

impossible  to  trace  resources  and  to  hold  institutions  accountable  for 
completion or failure.

5.2.2 

  Overall Assessment of the Roadmap

The diverging roles that actors played for EU gender equality policy, as 
opposed to EU gender policy programmes, influenced also their commit-
ment and support for gender equality policy in general. For the EWL and 
the FEMM Committee, in particular, it mattered whether the set-up of 
the gender equality policy programmes was closely connected to the usual 
roles  they  attributed  to  themselves  and  each  other  in  gender  equality. 
Because the FEMM Committee and the EWL—who had usually played an 
essential role for gender equality policy—felt excluded from drafting and 
negotiating  the  content,  they  developed  a  negative  assessment  of  the 
Roadmap.

In  the  overall  assessment  the  actors  discussed  the  Roadmap’s  subse-
quent ownership from the perspective of accountability, the missing bud-
get and whether it was placed in the foreground or pushed to the back. 
Variations of ownership were often connected to previous differentiations 
between  (non-)participating  DGs  or  differences  between  ‘newbies’  or 
‘oldies’. There were five different ownerships: ‘the baby’, ‘the dossier job’, 
‘the unknown world’, ‘the nice meal’ and ‘the damaged engine’. These 
different kinds of ownerships are more like a continuum rather than at the 
opposite ends.

Additionally,  different  assessments  developed  from  the  differences 
between the actors who drafted the Roadmap and the usual EU gender 
equality  policy  actors.  The  differences  can  be  characterised  as 
 institution- based  networks,  as  opposed  to  one  institution-transcending 
network. The change in collaboration routines, which was driven by the 
Commission, had the unintended consequence of limiting the impact of 
EU gender equality policy programmes. In terms of ownership it means 
that all stakeholders who did not own the Roadmap did not support the 
policy  programme.  They  weakened  the  overall  gender  equality  policy 
within the overall system of the EU. Historically, the strength of suprana-
tional gender equality policy was the collaboration of all actors in relation 
to an issue, rather than one of the major institutions or organisations act-
ing alone.

226 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

 ‘The Baby’
The first kind of ownership can be best described as ‘the baby’. Especially 
Commission officials from policy areas, such as employment, research and 
external relations, contributed large parts of the Roadmap and demon-
strated strong ownership. This kind of ownership more-or-less equals the 
first  group  of  DGs  which  were  engaged  in  many  content-related  areas. 
The respective Commission officials usually promoted the Roadmap and 
were  convinced  that  it  reflected  an  ambitious  EU  gender  equality 
programme:

I  would  say  more  responsibility,  more  ownership  by  the  DGs  of  the  different 
objectives and activities (…) And perhaps another thing is the division in the 
Roadmap between the first objectives and then the government, so the impor-
tance is given to the governance as well, and the relationship with the different 
stakeholders. (Commission official 6:321)

This  Roadmap  is  very  ambitious,  although  on  the  paper  it  looks  so  prudent. 
(Commission official 25:107)

It [the Roadmap] is very clear, because it makes the steps for each DG very 
clear, makes clear what the others do (…). It is extremely important and very 
good that there is such a frame in which every activity has a place somewhere. 
(Commission official 17:60)

I think the Roadmap … it’s good that it exists in the sense that it provides a 
framework for action, so it gives coherence, visibility and monitoring. And it’s 
good that it keeps the linkages between the work we do internally and the values 
and the principle that we try to discuss with our partners externally. So I think 
it’s good for coherence, what we do internally and externally, it’s good in terms 
of having clear commitments and priorities. (Commission official 19:34)

The quotations show how the Commission officials with this kind of 

ownership linked different aspects of the Roadmap:

•  the responsibilities of various DGs
•  the way in which the Roadmap was divided into different parts, con-

•  the  idea  that  the  Roadmap  promoted  certain  values  and  political 

tent and governance

goals (gender equality)

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  227

The  values  and  political  goals  distinguished  this  ownership  from  all 
others,  with  the  exception  of  ‘the  damaged  engine’.  Everyone  who 
described the Roadmap as their ‘baby’ expressed their personal commit-
ment to gender equality as an important goal in itself on other occasions 
as well.

Describing the Roadmap as a policy programme with clear activities, 
objectives and responsibilities for different DGs largely depended on the 
fact that for these Commission officials the Roadmap played a role in their 
work on a daily basis. For them, the activities and different responsibilities 
for different DGs were obvious. However, these aspects were not obvious 
for  someone  who  did  not  belong  to  this  group,  because  the  Roadmap 
never mentioned any particular responsibility for any DG or policy unit 
(Ahrens 2007). On the contrary, the reference in the Roadmap was always 
‘the  Commission’.  Interviewees  who  had  a  different  ownership  had  no 
knowledge about the detailed responsibilities. Others, such as the FEMM 
Committee and the EWL, relied on occasions when the Commissioner 
reported to the EP:

It [the Commission] likes to discuss it and on regular basis the Commission, 
Špidla, is invited to the European Parliament to come and tell the European 
Parliament which points of the Roadmap have already been treated. (Council 
representative 5:130)

Reporting to the EP can be seen as the typical exchange between two 
institutions: the Commission and EP. However, what is reported and 
how is always the choice of the presenter. Rather than reporting indi-
vidual  details,  the  Commissioner  usually  presents  an  overview.  There 
was a clear difference in the spatial breath of knowledgeability between 
those with ‘the baby’ ownership and the rest of the actors in terms of 
responsibilities.  Only  a  very  limited  number  of  actors  were  well-
informed about the details of the Roadmap and remembered the annual 
working plan.

 ‘The Dossier Job’
‘The dossier job’ ownership also predominantly comprised Commission 
officials with the responsibility for dealing with one or more elements of 
the Roadmap. The people with the ‘dossier job’ also belonged to the sec-
ond group of DGs from the drafting process. Colleagues often described 

228 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

their attitude as if they were executing the tasks with the least possible 
effort or as a way of fulfilling minimum standards:

So, what I do is try to prompt my colleagues to come forward frankly, candidly 
and I guarantee confidentiality. Tell me frankly, ‘look, I cannot do this, it’s 
impossible’ (…) What I try to do is to say: what can you do, what is your trouble-
shooting diagnosis? (Commission official 25:99)

There was no particular commitment to gender equality policy and the 
topic was often the last one on the list. However, there was some activity 
in order to implement commitments:

First, I don’t know if the [name of activity] was included in the Roadmap 
because I haven’t really read the Roadmap, so I had to be efficient and … prac-
tically involved in the set up of the European Year […]. (Commission official 
32:29)

The  activity17  that  the  Commission  official  mentioned  was  indeed 
included in the Roadmap and was implemented. By admitting that s/he 
was  unsure  whether  the  activity  was  included,  it  is  apparent  that  some 
content was compiled, but those who were responsible did not remember. 
As the activity was on the job dossier it was therefore implemented.

 ‘The Unknown World’
The DGs without any content-related contribution had the ownership of 
‘the unknown world’. They all had a connection to gender equality within 
a  specific  area,  predominantly  Annex  III  of  the  Roadmap,  the 
Commission’s  human  resource  management.  However,  the  Roadmap 
was not something that they considered as part of an overall EU gender 
equality policy. The ‘unknown world’ characterised their attitude towards 
the Roadmap, because they were neither critical nor supportive; they did 
not know the Roadmap and were surprised that it existed, yet they did 
not judge it.

I don’t know the Roadmap at all. At a European Level, I don’t know about an 
action plan, yes, there is one—for the seventh framework, for the two or three 
first years, but that’s all I know … but a Roadmap? (Expert Group represen-
tative 21:137)

5.2  LONG-TERM POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF THE POLICY PROCESS 

  229

The interviewees who belonged to this group perceived European gen-
der equality policy in a very narrow sense, predominantly as quotas for 
women (in the Commission’s human resources or increasing their partici-
pation in certain projects) or as a task of DG Employment.

 ‘The Nice Meal’
The  label  ‘the  nice  meal’  applied  to  interviewees  who  considered  the 
Roadmap as an acceptable approach of the Commission within their legal 
scope. The topics were suitable without seriously requiring activities from 
those who shared this kind of ownership. The Roadmap was something to 
‘digest’, to take into account and not to participate in. In particular, MEPs 
from the ALDE and the EPP, the Council representatives and employers’ 
organisations are included in this group.

In the Council, the Commission gives this information and it likes us to discuss 
it, to see if they are on the right track. But it’s not really the intention to change 
the Roadmap. Because it’s their responsibility and we don’t have any responsi-
bility for it. (…) If the presidency [of the EU] is not really asking … we wait 
until the Commission makes a report. And then we will discuss it. (Council 
representative 5:132)

It is quite clear that the Council was looking at the Roadmap as if it 
belonged to a different actor with no further obligations for member states.
The same view was expressed by ALDE and EPP MEPs and the repre-
sentative of an employers’ organisation. They considered the Roadmap as 
something that happened elsewhere but not in their own sphere; at best it 
was complementary to their own goals.

Well, I think it was a crucial point that one year ahead of the Roadmap draft-
ing  we  discussed  equal  opportunities  and  it  is  essential  to  have  this  kind  of 
complementary strategy, on the one hand the practical measures of the social 
partners on national levels and then the policy on the EU level. (Employers’ 
organisation representative 15:22)

Consequently,  the  interviewees  in  this  group  made  a  clear  division 
between the national and supranational level and showed no interest in 
whether  or  how  the  Roadmap  was  actually  implemented  by  the 
Commission.

230 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

 ‘The Damaged Engine’
The  final  ownership,  ‘the  damaged  engine’,  included  actors  who  were 
highly critical of the Roadmap and the Commission. They described the 
Roadmap  as  an  EU  policy  programme  without  any  power  and  impact. 
They realised that the Roadmap would be less ambitious than previous 
gender equality policy programmes. This group included MEPs from the 
PES, the Greens and the United Left, all NGO representatives, the trade 
union representative, member state representatives, one expert group rep-
resentative and two Commission officials.

It [the Roadmap] is not clear enough for citizens, not clear enough on concrete 
goals, and no innovative topics were included. (Member state representative 8:5)

I could say that it’s probably the first time that we have lost a proactive approach 
in gender … I think it’s in 1982, we started the first framework programme. 
There was another spirit behind it. There was a fighting spirit. It’s probably the 
first  time  that  it’s  more  a  conservative—not  a  political—but  a  conservative 
spirit from a political point of view. It’s conservative in the sense: Do we really 
need to invent something else? No, it’s ok, we just use the same things and we’ll 
see how it goes. There was less intervention in the Roadmap than there was in 
the years before. (EP official 23:158)

For this group the Roadmap became a sign of standstill. They realised 
that the loss of the Commission as an essential promoter of supranational 
gender equality initiatives had an impact on member states. As the previ-
ous ‘engine’ of supranational gender equality policy the Commission was 
critically examined and the results were anything but positive.

In summary, the two contrary ownerships of ‘the baby’ and ‘the dam-
aged  engine’  weakened  the  policy  implications  of  the  Roadmap.  As  an 
unintended  consequence  the  ownerships  strengthened  the  overall  com-
mitment  to  promote  gender  equality  at  a  supranational  level.  The  final 
Roadmap  document  satisfied  the  Commission  officials,  particularly  the 
Gender  Equality  Unit.  Commission  officials  extensively  supported  the 
Roadmap. Although the Commission’s civil servants, who were responsi-
ble for gender equality, were aware of the many critical points, they devel-
oped a common narrative of EU gender equality policy: ‘sooner or later 
we  will  succeed’.  This  was  the  self-image  of  Commission  officials;  they 
promoted a vision that in the long run they would succeed and convince 
the rest of the Commission.

5.3  CONCLUSION 

  231

On the other hand, the two other crucial supranational stakeholders, 
the FEMM Committee and the EWL, were dissatisfied with the final doc-
ument. These incompatible positions both resulted in a stronger commit-
ment for EU gender equality policy. While the Commission officials were 
entirely  committed  to  implementing  the  Roadmap  and  its  goals,  the 
FEMM  Committee  and  the  EWL  turned  their  disappointment  into 
increased activities and lobbying. Together, both attempts revitalised the 
gender  equality  policy  community  in  running  initiatives  that  no  longer 
relied on the Commission alone.

5.3 

  concluSion

The Roadmap reflected the changes in the way actors collaborated and 
interpreted  gender  equality  policy-making.  The  policy  implications  of  a 
programme  are  crucial,  because  the  content  transports  meaning  about 
what actors perceive as necessary actions to promote gender equality.

During the Roadmap process the short-term policy implications were 
virulent.  Even  though  the  content  was  not  designed  from  scratch,  but 
rather based on former policies and topics, the Commission shrank the 
policy content by compiling existing policies and by linking them to on- 
going processes in other policy areas without signposting new legislation. 
The Commission officials interpreted the Roadmap content as progress. 
According  to  them  gender  equality  was  stretched  and  integrated  into 
other policies. Therefore, the Roadmap was a contested issue, with a clear 
split  between  Commission  officials,  the  Council  and  the  conservative 
political spectrum on the one hand and representatives from NGOs and 
the left political spectrum of the EP on the other.

The lack of accountability and missing legal binding of the Roadmap 
was seen as a shift from innovative, specifically designed actions that aimed 
to push the boundaries of gender equality policy. The mere compilation of 
projects that were planned anyway signalled a clear rollback in comparison 
to previous programmes. From the Commission officials’ perspective, the 
Roadmap’s accountability ranked low, compared to other working duties, 
and implied an almost voluntary character.

The Roadmap also played an important role for the actors’ everyday 
routines.  While  on  the  national  level  actors  used  the  Roadmap  as  their 
reference  point,  on  the  supranational  level  those  in  charge  of  gender 
equality moved it to the background. Consequently, the short-term impli-
cations  of  EU  gender  equality  policy  programmes  were  reduced  and 

232 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

stripped off their earlier effectiveness in creating a supranational idea of 
gender equality.

The long-term implications after the adoption of the Roadmap included 
the withdrawal of resources from the Gender Equality Unit and the distri-
bution  of  the  budget  to  several  uncoordinated  Commission  units.  The 
withdrawal of control over the budget, the lack of an overall budget and 
the tentative allocation of resources reflected a move to disempower the 
central Commission actor. This lack of power signalled a lack of impor-
tance of gender equality. The Gender Equality Unit lost power in terms of 
running  gender  equality  projects  directly  and  together  with  member 
states. Actors seemed to have forgotten about the missing allocation of 
funds  the  moment  the  Roadmap  was  decoupled  from  an  action  pro-
gramme and they stopped asking about the budget.

The two contrary ownerships of Commission officials (‘the baby’) and 
NGOs  and  the  FEMM  Committee  (‘the  damaged  engine’)  amazingly 
raised the engagement in this policy area, even though the effect of the 
Roadmap itself decreased. With the split ownership of EU gender equality 
policy the actors’ constellations changed to institution-based networks, as 
opposed to one institution-transcending network. The change in collabo-
ration routines had the unintended consequence of limiting the impact of 
EU gender equality policy programmes.

Notwithstanding  the  criticism  by  representatives  of  NGOs,  member 
states and the EP, they still relied on the Roadmap as an important symbol 
for EU gender equality policy. They did not question the choice of policy 
instrument. Meanwhile, Commission officials moved the Roadmap to the 
background of their daily routine, as it included projects and actions that 
dominated their everyday work anyway.

In general, policy programmes with clearly defined political goals and 
budgets  were  often  overlooked  in  the  European  soft  law  policy  instru-
ments. The most well-known and well-researched programmes were the 
Structural Funds ESF and ERDF or the Framework Programmes (now 
Horizon 2020). While their time spans varied slightly, they usually cov-
ered  five  to  seven  years.18  These  policy  programmes  are  so  well- 
institutionalised that their existence is almost never questioned. However, 
the defined goals, the budget or the policy implications are regularly dis-
cussed when a programme comes to an end. Nonetheless, it is important 
to note that such five to seven year plans were not a usual feature of mem-
ber states policies; they are rather characteristic of the EU. While such five 
to seven year plans are surely picked up in the member states and shape the 

  NOTES 

  233

activities of national administrations, member states’ policies are still influ-
enced more by their governments and their terms of office.

Historically  speaking,  the  European  policy  programmes  were  estab-
lished in the mid-1970s with the first Social Action Programme.19 It was a 
programme which was strongly supported by the then governments and 
positively  perceived  (van  der  Vleuten  2007).  Policy  programmes  have 
since then become fashionable in EU policies, a first choice policy instru-
ment.  Gender  equality  policy  programmes  have  been  part  of  this  long 
established system almost from the beginning. They were one of the rea-
sons why gender equality policy actors were unable to imagine shifting to 
another approach. One reason for the unquestioned expectation that the 
Roadmap will sooner or later come into being, can be found in the posi-
tive impression of previous programmes. Almost all narratives about gen-
der equality policy—regardless of whether they came from MEPs, science 
or  NGOs—present  the  policy  programmes  as  a  success  story  of  gender 
equality. This proved that the EU has promoted gender equality (Hoskyns 
2000; Rees 1998; Woodward 2012). This success story was deeply embed-
ded in the memories of EU gender equality actors. However, none of the 
interviewees questioned the necessity of a policy programme or discussed 
alternative  policy  instruments.  Their  narratives  centered  on  what  could 
have been done or improved in comparison to previous programmes.

 
  1.  Cf. European Parliament resolution of 13th March 2007 on a Roadmap 
for equality between women and men (2006–2010) (2006/2132(INI)), 
OJ C 301E, 13.12.2007, p. 56–63.

noteS

  2.  During the interviews a printed version of the Roadmap was available.
  3.  The Commission official quoted a communication of their policy area. For 

the sake of anonymity, the policy area is not mentioned here.

  4.  Cf., for instance, Commission staff working paper. Roadmap for equality 
between  women  and  men  2006–2010  Work  Programme,  Brussels  31st 
July 2009, SEC(2009) 1113 final; Communication from the Commission 
to  the  Council,  The  European  Parliament,  the  Economic  and  Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions—Mid-term progress report 
on  the  Roadmap  for  equality  between  women  and  men  (2006–2010), 
Brussels, 26th November 2008, COM/2008/0760 final.

  5.  Rosalind Cavaghan (2012) provided an excellent analysis of gender main-

streaming implementation in DG Research.

234 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

  6.  After the author introduced the interview topic—negotiating the Roadmap 
as an example of gender equality policy—interviewees were initially asked 
to describe their everyday work.

  7.  Only civil servants from the Gender Equality Unit of DG Employment and 
civil servants from the European Parliament mentioned the Roadmap in 
their introductory description.

  8.  This is a non-exhaustive list.
  9.  Most of the contribution is calculated on the basis of the gross net income 
of each member state, with the remainder predominantly derived from a 
proportion of the value added tax (VAT) and import taxes.

 10.  Since the Lisbon Treaty came into force, the EP has shared power with the 
Council in adopting the budget. In fact, the adoption and planning of the 
EU budget is one of the only formal procedures where the EP can now 
strongly  influence  Council  and  Commission  decisions,  as  the  EP  can 
threaten to reject the budget.

 11.  The  multi-annual  financial  framework  must  be  unanimously  adopted  by 

the member states in the Council and the EP has to consent.

 12.  For details on allocation of funds to the priorities, please refer to the web-
site  of 
the  European  Commission:  http://ec.europa.eu/budget/
explained/budg_system/fin_fwk0713/fin_fwk0713_en.cfm#content_
struct (last access September 30, 2013).

 13.  PROGRESS merged five programmes: Council Decision 2000/750/EC 
of 27th November 2000 establishing a Community action programme to 
combat discrimination (2001–2006), Council Decision 2001/51/EC of 
20th December 2000 establishing a programme relating to the Community 
framework strategy on gender equality (2001–2005), European Parliament 
and Council Decisions No 50/2002/EC of 7th December 2001 establish-
ing a programme of community action to encourage cooperation between 
member states to combat social exclusion, No 1145/2002/EC of 10th 
June 2002 on Community incentive measures in the field of employment 
and  No  848/2004/EC  of  29th  April  2004  establishing  a  Community 
action programme to promote organisations active at European level in the 
field of equality between men and women.

 14.  Sophie  Jacquot  (2009,  2010)  already  highlighted  the  lost  budgetary 

autonomy of DG Employment and the gender equality Unit.

 15.  Cf. Decision No 1672/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 24th October 2006 establishing a Community Programme for 
Employment and Social Solidarity—Progress.

 16.  Cf.  European  Commission,  Progress  annual  performance  monitoring 
report  2012—Monitoring  of  the  performance  of  the  European  Union 
programme  for  employment  and  social  solidarity—Progress  (2007–13) 
(Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2013, p. 66).

  REFERENCES 

  235

 17.  In order to guarantee anonymity, the name of the activity is not revealed.
 18.  Some examples can be found in the section on asynchronous timing.
 19.  Council Resolution of 21 January 1974 concerning a social action pro-

gramme. OJ C 13, 12.2.1974, p. 1–4.

referenceS

Ahrens, Petra. 2007. Gleichstellungspolitik in der Europäischen Union. Expertise 

im Auftrag der Bundestagsfraktion DIE LINKE, ed. Berlin.

Ahrens,  Petra,  and  Sandra  Lewalter.  2005.  Möglichkeiten  der  Steuerung  bei  der 
Umsetzung von Gender Mainstreaming im Übergang zur Regelpraxis, text ver-
sion  of  the  eponymous  speech,  Conference  “Implementierung  von  Gender 
in  der  öffentlichen  Verwaltung  –  Chancen  und 
Mainstreaming 
Herausforderungen  der  Organisationsentwicklung”, 
June  27,  2005. 
Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin,  Gender  KompetenzZentrum.  Accessed 
October 1, 2013.  www.genderkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/vortrag_
steuerungsmöglichkeiten.pdf.

Cavaghan,  Rosalind.  2012.  Gender  Mainstreaming  as  a  Knowledge  Process: 
Towards an Understanding of Perpetuation and Change in Gender Blindness 
and Gender Bias. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh.

Hartlapp, Miriam, Julia Metz, and Christian Rauh (2013). Linking Agenda Setting 
to  Coordination  Structures:  Bureaucratic  Politics  Inside  the  European 
Commission. Journal of European Integration 35 (4): 425–441.

Hood, Christopher C. 1986. The Tools of Government. Chatham: Chatham House.
Hood, Christopher C., and Helen Z. Margetts. 2007. The Tools of Government in 

the Digital Age. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hoskyns,  Catherine.  2000.  A  Study  of  Four  Action  Programmes  on  Equal 
Opportunities.  In  Gender  Policies  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Maria  Grazia 
Rossilli, 43–59. New York, NY: Lang.

Jacquot, Sophie. 2009. La fin d’une politique d’exception: L’émergence du gen-
der mainstreaming et la normalisation de la politique communautaire d’égalité 
entre  les  femmes  et  les  hommes.  Revue francaise de science politique  59  (2): 
247–277.

———. 2010. The Paradox of Gender Mainstreaming: Unanticipated Effects of 
New Modes of Governance in the Gender Equality Domain. West European 
Politics 33 (1): 118–135.

Kassim, Hussein, and Patrick Le Galès. 2010. Exploring Governance in a Multi- 
Level Polity: A Policy Instruments Approach. West European Politics 33 (1): 
1–21.

Klein,  Uta.  2006.  Geschlechterverhältnisse  und  Gleichstellungspolitik  in  der 
Europäischen Union. Akteure - Themen - Ergebnisse. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für 
Sozialwissenschaften.

236 

5  ROADMAP TO NOWHERE

Lascoumes,  Pierre,  and  Patrick  Le  Galès.  2007.  Understanding  Public  Policy 

Through its Instruments. Governance 20 (1): 1–21.

MacRae, Heather. 2010. The EU as a Gender Equal Polity: Myths and Realities. 

Journal of Common Market Studies 48 (1): 155–174.

Mazur, Amy G. 2017. Toward the Systematic Study of Feminist Policy in Practice: 

An Essential First Step. Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 38 (1): 64–83.

Peters,  B.  Guy,  Maurice  Falk,  and  Frans  K.M.  van  Nispen.  1998.  Public  Policy 
Instruments.  Evaluating  the  Tools  of  Public  Administration.  Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar.

Rees, Teresa L. 1998. Mainstreaming Equality in the European Union: Education 

Training and Labour Market Policies. London: Routledge.

Salamon, Lester M. 2002. The Tools of Government: A Guide to the New Governance. 

New York: Oxford University Press.

Schmitter,  Phillipe  C.  1970.  Central  American  Integration:  Spill-Over,  Spill- 

Around or Encapsulation? Journal of Common Market Studies 9 (1): 1–48.

Van der Vleuten, Anna. 2007. The Price of Gender Equality: Member States and 

Governance in the European Union. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Woodward, Alison E. 2012. From Equal Treatment to Gender Mainstreaming and 
Diversity Management. In Gendering the European Union: New Approaches to 
Old  Democratic  Deficits,  ed.  Gabriele  Abels  and  Joyce  Marie  Mushaben, 
85–103. Houndmills, Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

CHAPTER 6

Conclusion

This is really a normal process.

(Interview with Commission official)

This book has illustrated the retrenchment of EU gender equality policy 
programmes. This retrenchment came as a surprise. EU gender equality 
policy programmes were—next to directives and gender mainstreaming—
the third tool of the European Commission’s promotion of gender equal-
ity. From the beginning, EU gender equality policy programmes initiated 
networking and promoted gender equality on topics that were unusual for 
most member states at the time. The programmes often set objectives that 
later  provided  the  basis  for  legislative  proposals.  The  adoption  of  the 
Roadmap signalled a severe deterioration: references to legal obligations 
to promote gender equality were missing in the introduction and it was 
the first ever gender equality policy programme without its own action 
programme and a clearly defined budget. Moreover, it did not provide for 
any new legislative proposals or actions which required the direct involve-
ment of member states or Social Partners. Some of these deteriorations 
were  pre-programmed  before  the  drafting  of  the  Roadmap  started:  the 
European Commission decided to decouple the policy programme from 
the idea and implication of an action programme with its own budget and 
outreach beyond the supranational level. The previous budget—allocative 

237

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4_6238 
 

6  CONCLUSION

resources in form of an action programme—was moved to PROGRESS. It 
was taken away from the actors who were responsible for designing gender 
equality policy. As illustrated in Chap. 5, the Gender Equality Unit justi-
fied the unknown budget as a way of implementing gender mainstreaming 
with the idea of integrating the budget into other policies. However, they 
lost power over their allocative resources.

In this final chapter I would like to pick up these issues and explain the 
unexpected rollback of EU gender equality policy programmes. Why did 
the European Commission, and especially the Gender Equality Unit of 
DG Employment, disarm this particular soft law tool of EU gender equal-
ity policy? How did they do it? And what are we to make of this rollback 
of EU gender equality policy programmes? What are the losses—and the 
possible gains—of these changes?

First,  the  unexpected  policy  process  that  led  to  the  Roadmap  only 
appears as an anomaly at first sight. The different chapters of the book 
reveal that this anomaly is in fact the normalisation of gender equality as a 
supranational policy field. With the adoption of the Roadmap at the latest, 
a particular path for gender equality policy moved into a new direction. 
While equality policy seemed to be ‘dependent’ on its velvet triangle—its 
soft law tools and gender mainstreaming—new rules and routines became 
institutionalised.  However,  these  rules  and  practices  had  existed  long 
before; they had not been enforced in the policy area of gender equality 
until the Roadmap was negotiated. This shift can be best described as a 
normalisation of the policy area, an adjustment to the usual EU rules and 
routines. While it might look like an anomaly it is actually an adoption to 
the routines and practices that prevailed in the other EU policy areas.

The  question  is  why  this  normalisation  took  place.  This  question  is 
particularly important when we consider that gender equality followed a 
different path than other policy areas in the EU (Jacquot 2015). It is, for 
example, the only policy domain where the EU had reached higher stan-
dards than settling for the least common denominator (Hix 2005). While 
path-dependency would make us expect that ‘past events influence future 
events’ (Mahoney 2000: 510), the previous gender equality policy- making 
took an unexpected direction with the Roadmap and the former path was 
abandoned. Institutionalism might make us expect that actors would rec-
ognise the ’wrong’ new path. Chapter 3 indicated that some actors clearly 
expected the usual path, but those who controlled the adoption process in 
the European Commission did not even recognise that they had left the 
former path. Only by using an actor-centred sociological approach to EU 

6.1  THE PRIMACY OF HOME INSTITUTION 

  239

gender equality policy-making it was possible to reveal that the assumed 
anomaly was indeed normalisation. The approach was also necessary to 
define the core features of the crucial changes to the institutionalised gen-
der equality policy programmes and to show how the EU ‘promotes femi-
nist goals, diverts them, and works against them all at once’ (Prügl 2006: 
444). The in-depth review of the Roadmap process and the scrutiny of the 
interpretations of EU gender equality policy-making enabled me to recog-
nise the interplay of actors and structure: it led to the normalisation of 
gender equality as a supranational EU policy area.

How  did  this  normalisation  happen  and  what  are  its  core  features? 
What are the factors that shifted the EU gender equality policy-making 
process and influenced actions and decisions at certain points in time?

6.1 

  The Primacy of home insTiTuTion

In view of the usual division of powers among supranational institutions, 
the primacy of the home institution might not be surprising, but expected. 
However,  in  terms  of  EU  gender  equality  policy-making,  two  specific 
aspects are peculiar. First, EU policy is more often driven by member states’ 
national interests and less by the primacy of the home institution. EU pol-
icy-making also relies on the notion of ‘participatory democracy’, particu-
larly in the Commission, which explicitly aims to involve stakeholders and 
civil society.1 Therefore, a different picture could have been expected; one 
where the Commission would have personally consulted a range of stake-
holders and not relied only on their papers (see Chap. 3). This is all the 
more surprising for a second reason. Historically, gender equality policy 
was characterised by an institution-transcending policy network. Therefore, 
the primacy of the home institution contradicted the history of EU gender 
equality policy. The strength of the gender equality policy was rooted in 
the stable and long-lasting collaboration between individual actors from 
different institutions (Jacquot 2015; Woodward 2004).

In this regard, it is important to observe how interviewees described each 
other. Interviewees spoke of ‘the Commission’, ‘the Parliament’ the ‘Social 
Partners’ and ‘the Advisory Committee’ as if each of them was a homoge-
nous entity with a common position on gender equality policy. Actors rep-
resented their institution; the individual actor and the  institution became 
one  and  the  same.  The  pressure  to  adjust  to  a  certain  institutional  role 
(Commission officials, MEP, etc.) strongly undermined the use of former 
personal ties and the relationships which prevailed in the velvet triangle.

240 
 

6  CONCLUSION

The process of disintegrating the previous velvet triangle and returning 
to the home institution as the guide for one’s own actions did not occur 
suddenly  or  visibly.  The  change  took  place  incrementally  during  the 
Roadmap’s drafting and adoption process. The Commission officials, par-
ticularly the Gender Equality Unit, stuck to the standard Commission rou-
tines and established a closed internal process. The external actors, such as 
FEMM committee members or civil society, did not realise the incremental 
changes  in  the  beginning,  due  to  their  limited  knowledge  about  the 
Commission’s working routines. The reason why the Commission actors 
left their previous path can be explained by the routine rotation principle 
(see  Chap.  4).  If  the  same  Commission  actors  would  have  occupied  the 
same jobs during the preceding policy programmes, i.e. the framework strat-
egy, they might have acted otherwise. The job rotation inside the Commission 
disturbed the usual rules of gender equality policy programmes.

Last not least, the process was accelerated by new actors who had not 
been involved in the policy area previously and had less experience with 
gender studies and feminism than the old gender equality policy actors’ 
who were still present in the EP and in NGOs. This does not imply that 
new actors necessarily meant deterioration. However, the lack of account-
ability and binding of the Roadmap and the primacy of the home institu-
tion  also  applied  to  many  DGs  which  prioritised  the  completion  of  a 
programme rather than implementing gender equality within it.

This became especially evident when the drafting process was limited to 
the  Commission  DGs  (see  Chap.  2).  The  actors’  collaboration  shifted 
from  an 
institution-transcending  collaboration—the  velvet  triangle 
(Woodward 2004)—to a multiplicity of spaces. These were shaped by pro-
cedural rules and routines with the adoption of a Commission communi-
cation. In contrast to the previously collaborative approach the Roadmap 
process  was  split  into:  (a)  the  internal  Commission  process  where  the 
Roadmap was drafted and adopted, (b) the interinstitutional process as a 
consultative  background  and  (c)  the  external  process  with  the  gender 
lunches of the NGOs and the European Parliament. In all of these pro-
cesses the institution-transcending network was incrementally abandoned 
by all actors. This reduced the power of all supranational gender equality 
policy actors.

During  the  Roadmap  process  gender  equality  policy  actors  became 
increasingly  busy  with  scrutinising  each  other.  The  FEMM  Committee 
and the EWL were particularly critical of the Commission. Gender equal-
ity started to resemble any other policy area: a negotiation process among 

6.1  THE PRIMACY OF HOME INSTITUTION 

  241

competing stakeholders. As the analysis of the policy implications demon-
strated (see Chap. 5), the primacy of the home institution did not result 
only in changes to the actors’ collaboration, it also had the unintended 
consequence of diminishing the Roadmap’s content as a policy programme 
and the commitment to it.

The standard procedures and processes of the institutions did not really 
change, it was rather the way in which gender equality policy actors applied 
them.  Some  elements  in  the  standard  process  and  procedures  did  not 
change at all and remained stable. In particular, the role of the Gender 
Equality Unit in the policy process (the ‘wrong ownership’) and the role 
of  the  EWL  as  the  major  hub  for  NGOs  lobbying  activities  remained 
unchallenged.

The involvement of the usual ‘non-participating’ actors did not change 
much either. The most powerful DGs abstained from contributing to the 
Roadmap content without being sanctioned or openly criticised. Instead, 
the  Commission  officials  who  were  actually  involved  in  the  Roadmap 
implementation tried to maintain the image that gender mainstreaming 
would be implemented in all DGs through participation in the Roadmap. 
When gender equality did not fit the standard procedure, it was returned 
to the actors in charge of gender equality policy. It was treated as a prob-
lem rather than a structural problem: a problem with those who are unwill-
ing to implement gender mainstreaming. The implementation of gender 
mainstreaming became a technical challenge. It would need to adjust to 
the  existing  procedures  and  was  not  considered  a  tool  to  question  or 
change the existing procedures. The role of additional actors who were 
responsible for the budget (by including it in the PROGRESS programme) 
remained completely vague. They became crucial for gender equality, but 
it was unclear whether the shift of responsibilities resulted in a real change 
of duties.

It was astonishing that losing resources (see Chap. 5) was not identified 
as a problem by the FEMM Committee in its Roadmap resolution. At the 
time of the interviews, the significant loss of allocative resources was almost 
entirely forgotten by all interviewees. Actors had already adjusted to the 
new but normalised routines. In particular, the interviewees from the EP 
were often astonished about the loss and only vaguely remembered it. This 
‘lost memory’ is particularly surprising in view of the MEPs, as the EP is a 
powerful  EU  institution  with  regard  to  allocative  resources  as  it  has  to 
adopt the budget. Surely, the Council decides the budget, but the Council 
lacks the authoritative resources to force the EP to agree the EU budget.2

242 
 

6  CONCLUSION

6.2 

  comPromise culTure and dePoliTicisaTion

Even though the change to the primacy of the home institution contained 
a  potential  for  conflict  between  the  European  Commission  on  the  one 
hand and the EP and NGOs on the other, the Roadmap process never 
resulted in an open and ‘noisy’ conflict. Instead we see a compromise cul-
ture at work that facilitated the change to the primacy of home institution. 
It is an important reason for allowing the normalisation process to hap-
pen. Negotiating and log-rolling are characteristic features of EU policy- 
making. Simon Hix characterised the EU as a ‘hyper-consensus polity’ (Hix 
2006: 145); it is a routine that also played a great role in gender equality 
policy and had a severe impact on the process and content of the Roadmap 
(see Chap. 3).

The pressure to find a compromise was evident in every single inter-
view.  The  majority  of  interviewees  mentioned  compromise  as  a  ruling 
characteristic  of  EU  policy-making  and  everyone  followed  this  routine 
without  questioning  it.3  A  specific  expression  of  compromise  was  the 
avoidance of conflict or rejection. The compromise pressure meant that 
open conflict was avoided, even when the expected conflict might not have 
developed at all. Avoiding open conflict was the reason compromise pro-
duced silence among the members of the velvet triangle during the policy 
process.  As  long  as  the  velvet  triangle  functioned,  compromise  worked 
well for gender equality policy programmes. Chapter 5 provided examples 
of the avoidance of open conflicts at the price of compromise: legislative 
proposals were excluded and existing activities of the DGs were compiled 
for the Roadmap key actions, whereas new activities were not released.

The Gender Equality Unit excluded legislative proposals which were 
put forward in the Advisory Committee and by the EWL, because this 
would have caused conflicts with the powerful administrative DGs and in 
the Council. Later on the FEMM Committee did not openly criticise the 
missing legislative proposals in the EP resolution. They solely pointed to 
the fact that there was not a single legislative proposal. The reply of the 
Commission to the EP avoided a direct answer. It simply stated that there 
were  legislative  measures,  such  as  monitoring  the  implementation  of 
directives.

In terms of key actions, the Gender Equality Unit was keen on includ-
ing all DGs. This ambition had not been fulfilled in previous policy pro-
grammes and this is one reason why the Gender Equality Unit accepted 
the compromise of not asking for new activities. Although this was often 

6.2  COMPROMISE CULTURE AND DEPOLITICISATION 

  243

criticised and seen as a sign of the Roadmap lacking accountability and 
binding, it did not result in open conflict. A good example for accepting 
compromise pressure was the reaction of a MEP who was deeply disap-
pointed about the EP’s resolution. It ignored many amendments regard-
ing  the  missing  accountability  which  was  proposed  by  the  shadow 
rapportrices, yet s/he suppressed open opposition in order to guarantee 
an adoptable resolution in the FEMM Committee.

Compromise  culture  as  a  routine  procedure  placed  gender  equality 
policy in a powerless place, as it did not have ‘currency’ compared to other 
policies. Interviewees who normally did not participate in gender equality 
policy called it ‘orchid politics’, a hobby rather than serious political busi-
ness. For them it was a policy area that relied on committed people and 
was similar to debates about the death penalty. Therefore, it would not be 
possible to log-roll or negotiate with others, as they did not take gender 
equality policy and its actors seriously, they actually devalued it.

Therefore, compromise culture is an obstacle to gender equality policy 
and provides an excellent example of how gendered power relations are 
supported by institutional routines. From the description and interpreta-
tions of policy-making we can conclude that actors faced problems when 
insisting on their priorities face-to-face with institutional actors from the 
same level who were considered more powerful. The DGs who partici-
pated only in the part of the human resource management and contrib-
uted nothing to the content were male-dominated. They were perceived 
as  most  powerful  and  most  distant  to  gender  equality  policy-making  
(see Chap. 2).

Accepting  this  compromise  culture  also  resulted  in  the  avoidance  of 
open opposition. As the main strategy of all actors was avoiding confronta-
tion, this did not confront the issue of gender equality in general. On the 
contrary, non-confrontation was bad for progress. Not only did gender 
equality actors have to follow this compromise culture, all other actors had 
to subordinate to it. This had the effect that opposition turned into indi-
rect forms (Ahrens 2013). Compromise sidestepped open opposition on 
two levels: (1) it limited opposition to a dissatisfactory content (for many 
actors);  (2)  it  limited  direct  opposition  towards  gender  equality.  As  a 
result, the Gender Equality Unit managed to secure the institutional EU 
gender equality policy programmes.

Overall, the compromise culture had a depoliticising effect. It led to 
retrenchment  and  turned  the  Roadmap  into  a  mere—yet  important—
symbol for EU gender equality policy. Actors did not deviate from this 

244 
 

6  CONCLUSION

routine and the whole process became a technical procedure. Many inter-
viewees  were  convinced  that  gender  equality  policy-making  and  the 
Roadmap would have gained much from a broader discussion (see Chap. 
3). It could have been more ambitious, precise and innovative, it could 
have contributed to further improvements in gender equality. It confirmed 
the impression that this policy area did (and does) not have ‘currency’ and 
was considered ‘niche politics’ compared to others.

6.3 

  consequences of The normalisaTion

What are the consequences of the normalisation of gender equality policy? 
What did we lose, what did we gain? The findings point to severe conse-
quences.  First,  the  findings  suggest  that  the  era  of  EU  gender  equality 
policy  programmes  with  a  direct  outreach  has  come  to  an  end.  Policy 
programmes, as the second pillar of EU gender policy, lost much of their 
original impact and left gender mainstreaming as the last remaining pillar. 
The previous distinct path of EU gender equality policy turned into ‘a 
normal process’ (interview with Commission official) whereas the policy 
outcome deteriorated.

With the adoption of the Roadmap, the Commission invented some-
thing entirely new in the EU’s gender equality policy and at the EU level 
overall: a policy programme without a clear budget and no defined future 
plans, an overview of ongoing activities in this policy area. Notwithstanding 
the changes, the Roadmap was presented as a continuation of gender equal-
ity policy to date. It was presented to the public as the commonly agreed 
EU  policy  programme  which  reflected  every  forthcoming  policy- related 
action in the defined time span. As demonstrated in the empirical chapters, 
this was neither right nor wrong. Gender equality policy programmes fol-
lowed a certain logic of the policy process where the rules, actors and the 
overall context of EU policy-making influenced the content.

From  piecing  together  the  actors’  narratives  about  the  drafting  and 
adoption of the Roadmap over the course of time, we have learned that 
actors are aware of their individual institutional situatedness and, at the 
same time, their institutions’ placement within the EU system. They are 
aware of multiple constraints, but also of the ‘windows of opportunity’ 
(Kingdon 1984). The Gender Equality Unit strictly applied the rules on 
Commission  communications  and  simultaneously  referred  to  gender 
mainstreaming rules in order to involve as many DGs as possible. Therefore, 
actors implicitly—and sometimes even explicitly—knew their options for 

6.3  CONSEQUENCES OF THE NORMALISATION 

  245

actions, particularly in terms of rules and routines. Just as structuration 
theory stipulates, actors have a choice to act in this or that way; e.g. in the 
case of the drafting process the Gender Equality Unit had the choice to 
limit contacts between internal and external actors.

Why actors chose to act in a specific way is related to the way in which 
they interpreted the policy process from their institutional perspective and 
within a wider context. Different institutions, such as the Commission, EP 
and Council, follow their own rules, norms and routines. This affects the 
different views and expectations of the Roadmap policy-making and the 
rationalisation of their actions. For the Commission, the Roadmap was a 
routine publication, a normal policy process, slightly more important than 
other  aspects  of  everyday  work.  Whereas  almost  everyone  had  a  basic 
knowledge about the work of the Gender Equality Unit, actors from insti-
tutions other than the Commission were hardly able to evaluate how the 
Commission  worked  internally,  what  specific  constraints  the  individual 
and the institution faced and why one individual actors did not choose to 
act differently. The same applied to the reverse perspective: Commission 
officials were seldom able to evaluate how and why external actors acted 
the way they did. In addition, the fluctuation of actors changed the way in 
which the original Roadmap was interpreted and implemented. Although 
the  institutional  role  remained  the  same,  the  civil  servants  changed, 
thereby potentially bringing about political change.

Gender  equality  policy  has  become  a  supranational  policy  area.  The 
relational  system  of  the  actors  who  are  involved  in  EU  gender  equality 
policy is clearly the EU system and not the member states at the national 
level. All interactions and interpretations are almost exclusively concerned 
with supranational policy-making. However, the downside of this kind of 
policy-making  is  characterised  by  the  absence  of  an  active  Council.  By 
limiting the Roadmap policy to Commission activities, the Gender Equality 
Unit of DG Employment has become the first ‘needle’s eye’ (Ostner and 
Lewis 1998). Without this particular actor, gender equality policy merely 
remains at the level of symbolic politics. This aspect has become even more 
evident with the shift of the responsibility for gender equality from DG 
Employment to DG Justice in 2010. The findings about gender equality 
policymaking  shortly  before  the  2010  shift  provide  the  necessary  back-
ground for understanding the further deterioration of EU gender equality 
policy  in  recent  years.  Connections  to  civil  society  were  used  less  and 
member states were exempted from responsibilities. When in such a situa-
tion  the  main  supranational  initiator  for  policies  turns  inactive  or  

246 
 

6  CONCLUSION

disempowers its administrative units, other actors face severe problems in 
keeping the promotion of gender equality going. The Commission and its 
Gender Equality Unit seemed to have switched from an ally to an ‘enemy’ 
from the perspective of NGOs. It became an actor that needs to be lob-
bied in order to widen and deepen gender equality policy.

Although the Commission officials in charge of gender equality were 
aware that there were many critical points about the Roadmap, they devel-
oped a common narrative of EU gender equality policy, a narrative of a 
promising and successful policy. The self-image in the Commission offi-
cials’ narratives presented them as promoting a vision of gender equality 
that will be successfully implemented in the long run. However, the policy 
implications of the Roadmap contradicted the picture. As gender equality 
policy actors started to act according to the general rules of the EU system 
(as other EU actors do), they started to fail and became less powerful, 
because gender equality policy is not accepted as an equal policy; it does 
not have ‘currency’.

From the actors’ perspectives they did everything to secure a valuable 
and  innovative  policy  programme  that  guaranteed  stability  and  allowed 
progress.  However,  the  opposite  happened,  as  the  shift  of  the  drafting 
process to the internal processes of the Commission resulted in the sacri-
fice  of  a  strong  policy  network,  the  velvet  triangle  (Woodward  2004). 
Ambitious  and  conflictual  proposals  were  subordinated  to  compromise 
pressure and became impossible to implement on a supranational level. By 
compiling existing activities rather than designing new projects and fur-
nishing them with a clear budget, gender equality was integrated or even 
subordinated to other projects. They became a second-order obligation. 
By limiting the drafting process to the Commission Interservice Group, 
rather  than  building  a  broad  institution-transcending  approach,  gender 
equality became ‘ghettoised’ in each institution.

National women’s movements (and/or women’s policy agencies) were 
successful when they pressured for gender equality policy in the EU to get 
their own member states moving, as long as gender equality actors simul-
taneously  collaborated  in  the  velvet  triangle.  This  kind  of  cooperation 
proved  successful  because  the  actors  played  a  different  and  subversive 
game  outside  the  usual  EU  policy-making  process.  As  Jacquot  (2015) 
noted:  the  introduction  of  gender  mainstreaming  in  the  Treaty  of 
Amsterdam produced an isomorphism for gender equality policy actors (in 
particular the Commission). Subsequently, they have become ‘part of the 
system’ and adjusted to the standard rules.

6.3  CONSEQUENCES OF THE NORMALISATION 

  247

While bearing the deteriorating circumstances in mind there is also a 
positive reading of the rollbacks. It was surprising to see how individual 
actors of all major institutions (the Commission, EP, EWL) managed to 
continue promoting gender equality. How did they succeed in adapting to 
the  overall  mainstream  arguments  without  losing  the  common  idea  of 
promoting gender equality? Besides the limitations there was also stability. 
Why did gender equality policy at an EU level still exist? How did actors 
manage to maintain the fundamental structures, subjects and instruments 
when everything else was changing?

Nevertheless, the relationship between EU gender equality policy and 
gender mainstreaming seems to have become delicate. As gender main-
streaming was presented as the only way forward in gender equality, the 
challenge is that if it is withdrawn, if it is defined as a problem or if it is 
presented as a failure, would in the end become a failure of gender equality 
policy  in  itself.  While  gender  equality  policy  is  severely  challenged  and 
questioned, its money is cut back and programmes are rejected and actors 
claim  to  have  already  integrated  gender  aspects  through  gender  main-
streaming. There have already been adoptions of the mainstreaming idea 
for other vulnerable groups, e.g. in terms of family, diversity or equality 
mainstreaming  that  diminish  the  original  ideas  and  reasons  for  gender 
mainstreaming (Woodward 2012).

The concept of gender equality policy as the historical forerunner of 
institution-transcending collaboration and involvement of civil society and 
academia (Woodward 2004) would bring about a salient case for challeng-
ing the myth of participatory democracy. How is this myth implemented 
in practice? It was illustrated by social movement research (Della Porta 
and Diani 2006) as a one way street, for example. In the broader research 
literature the role of civil society in the EU is analysed by Kohler-Koch and 
Quittkat (2011), Liebert and Trenz (2009), the emerging European pub-
lic sphere is discussed by Bee and Bozzini (2010), Koopmans and Statham 
(2010), Statham and Trenz (2013). Yet, it becomes crucial to pay greater 
attention to reciprocal perceptions between civil society and supranational 
institutions and their interaction. Against the background of the changes 
in the actors’ collaboration and the following exclusion of NGOs, further 
information on these specific relationships can certainly shed more light 
on power relations.

We  have  seen  how  women’s  movements  found  a  way  to  cope  with 
changing circumstances which are caused by shifting political responsibili-
ties from national to supranational levels. This is of great importance for 

248 
 

6  CONCLUSION

policy fields like gender equality. The EU example is especially interesting 
because institutions like the European Commission emphasise the crucial 
role of civil society in general and women’s movements in particular for 
defining gender equality policy. Furthermore, the Commission states that 
it works on establishing continuous channels of collaboration with civil 
society  actors  to  improve  the  definition  of  policy  goals.  However,  the 
actual role of women’s movements in current formal and informal net-
works of EU gender equality policy remained underexplored.

Overall, the newly established actors’ collaboration in EU gender equal-
ity  policy-making  seemed  to  warrant  additional  exploration.  When  the 
label ‘velvet triangle’ (Woodward 2004) might no longer be applicable, we 
have to ask which concepts would be more suitable. Two opposed perspec-
tives seem to be worth considering: (1) the exploration of actors’ collabora-
tion  as  policy  networks  which  are  mainly  driven  by  mistrust,  power 
asymmetries, conflicts and competition instead of trust, problem- solving 
and coordination, as suggested by Holger Straßheim (2011); (2) the explo-
ration of collaboration among gender equality actors as a form of pioneer-
ing,  supranational  cooperation  practice  by  employing  standard  rules  in 
order to pave the way for a transformed understanding of these rules.

Exploring the role of compromise and cooperation as a dominant rou-
tine of EU policy-making can also facilitate the development of a new per-
spective on actors’ collaboration and link to the often-discussed democratic 
deficit. From an overarching perspective, the Roadmap policy process was 
an  important  example  of  this  democratic  deficit:  ‘the  problem  (…)  that 
major political decisions are made in executive networks relatively detached 
from democratic control’ (Kauppi 2011: 169). In the case of the Roadmap’s 
policy-making,  the  major  political  decisions  were  taken  in  the  executive 
network of the Commission Interservice Group on gender equality, which 
was detached from the democratic control of the European Parliament, the 
Council of the European Union and civil society organisations.

Even  though  gender  equality  policy  showed  little  progress  after  the 
advent of the new century, gender equality policy programmes were still 
institutionalised and seemed to contribute stability as a focal point in the 
changing EU gender equality landscape. As we know by now, the clear 
signs  of  rollback—no  budget,  no  legislation,  loss  of  networks—marked 
the first moves of dismantling the important soft law tool of policy pro-
grammes that ultimately resulted in today’s meagre European Commission 
staff  working  document:  the  ‘Strategic  engagement  for  gender  equality 
2016–2019’. Gender equality policy has obviously lost its function as a 

6.3  CONSEQUENCES OF THE NORMALISATION 

  249

means of highlighting the importance of supranational policy-making; the 
‘foundational myth’ (MacRae 2010) is dead.

In political sciences, gender equality policy has often been seen as an 
ongoing discourse and construction of policy problems and solutions. The 
way  in  which  feminist  ideas  were  challenged  by  dominant  frameworks 
derived from other EU policy areas. However, we need to integrate more 
thoroughly  the  actual  choices  and  interactions  of  the  actors  who  are 
involved in gender equality policy-making through sociological analysis, 
for example. Furthermore, we need to include a thorough analysis of how 
the institutional setting constrains and enables actors in making choices; 
which rules and routines shape how gender equality can be successfully 
promoted in supranational policies.

Analysing  gender  equality  policy-making  from  the  perspective  of  its 
policy programmes provided a fruitful perspective to understand the hid-
den aspects of EU policy-making at a micro-level, from a vertical perspec-
tive (inside institutions) and a horizontal perspective (among institutions). 
EU gender equality programmes hold great importance for understanding 
EU policy-making in gender equality, as policy programmes represent one 
of the three salient elements of this policy area, along with legislation and 
gender mainstreaming. Policy programmes can be defined as soft law and 
the gender equality action programmes that have been implemented since 
the early 1980s were not only written text on paper. They were also backed 
by money and projects to influence member states with regard to a certain 
understanding  of  gender  equality.  By  setting  benchmarks,  introducing 
new topics, supporting transnational network building and paving the way 
for several legislative proposals, gender equality policy programmes were 
for a long time a successful tool in this policy area, with a strong outreach 
to member states.

The reconstruction of the policy process from a sociological perspec-
tive,  based  on  the  narratives  of  individual  actors  who  were  involved  in 
policy-making but came from a variety of institutions, demonstrated who 
participated in the policy process of adopting the ‘Roadmap for equality 
between men and women 2006–2010’ as a gender equality policy pro-
gramme. The specific interplay of gender equality policy actors and EU 
routines was influenced by three main factors: shifts, compromise and the 
primacy of home institution. These factors illustrated the rollback of EU 
gender equality policy.

The scale of research of EU gender equality policy is extensive and mul-
tifaceted, particularly in terms of what we can learn for EU integration in  

250 
 

6  CONCLUSION

general. There is a pressing need to take the role of individual actors into 
account, in order to allow a further assessment of how they exploit the 
available policy choices.

How this important element of EU gender equality policy is set up was 
an open question in research—one that became extremely important when 
the  Roadmap  fundamentally  changed  the  character  of  the  policy  pro-
grammes. The investigation of the reasons for this change was the initial 
starting point of this study.

The  actors  who  were  involved  in  gender  equality  policy-making  had 
different  narratives  about  the  same  policy  process  and  the  negotiations 
over time. They also demonstrated a large number of contradictory inter-
pretations. Contrasting different actors’ narrations about drafting, negoti-
ating and deciding upon the content of gender equality policy programmes 
helped to better understand how actors reconstruct certain institutional 
rules and routines and how they rationalise their actions.

Choosing to publish the Roadmap as a Commission communication 
without  the  necessity  of  a  formal  adoption  by  the  Council  and  the  EP 
limited the number of institutional actors who were involved in negotiat-
ing the supranational EU gender equality policy. In particular, setting up 
the Roadmap as a Commission communication guaranteed low resistance 
and  reduced  conflicts  among  relevant  actors:  resistance  from  inside  the 
Commission was prevented by emphasising gender mainstreaming, while 
resistance  external  to  the  Commission  was  prevented  by  emphasising 
Commission procedures. Overall, gender equality actors strictly followed 
standard EU policy-making rules and combined them with rules from the 
gender mainstreaming strategy. They also prioritised standard EU policy- 
making rules over previous informal collaborations. This changed the way 
actors collaborate in EU gender equality policy. Yet, the making of policy 
programmes appeared in the narrations as an unbroken history. All of this 
happened silently. From the outside, it looked like an unexciting standard 
process: ‘business as usual’. The policy implications of EU gender equality 
policy programmes became less clear due to the changing actors’ constel-
lations  and  changing  routines.  In  particular,  the  decision  to  set  up  the 
Roadmap solely as a Commission communication reduced the potential 
for activities and denied the opportunity to include actions that had to be 
negotiated  with  member  states,  Social  Partners  or  other  stakeholders. 
Consequently,  the  crucial  change  to  the  nature  of  the  previous  actors’ 
constellation  and  the  way  of  coping  with  a  certain  EU  structure  

caused  a  pause  in  the  deepening  and  widening  of  EU  gender  equality 
policy through policy programmes.

  REFERENCES 

  251

 
 1.  For a critical review of the EU consultation procedures towards civil society 

noTes

please refer to the edited volume by Kohler- Koch and Quittkat (2011).

 2.  This kind of loss of allocative resources did not hold true for other Roadmap 
priority areas of action: the DGs on external relations and research not only 
drafted their Roadmap chapters; they also posited the allocative and some-
times even the authoritative resources in their policy area to support gender 
equality policy.

 3.  Securing compromise is the characterising policy- making feature of the EP, 
for instance. For more details please cf. Raiser (2014) and on committee 
reports and resolutions cf. Marshall (2010).

references

Ahrens,  Petra.  2013.  Diffuse  Barriers  to  Gender  Equality:  The  Occurrence  of 
Indirect  Opposition.  7th  ECPR  General  Conference,  Sciences  Po  Bordeaux, 
4–7 September 2013.

Bee, Cristiano, and Emanuela Bozzini, eds. 2010. Mapping the European Public 

Sphere: Institutions, Media and Civil Society. Farnham: Ashgate.

Della Porta, Donatella, and Mario Diani. 2006. Social Movements: An Introduction. 

Oxford: Blackwell.

Macmillan.

Hix, Simon. 2005. The Political System of the European Union. London: Palgrave 

———.  2006.  The  European  Union  as  a  Polity  (I).  In  Handbook  of  European 
Union Politics, ed. Knud Erik Jørgensen, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben Rosamond, 
141–158. London; Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Jacquot, Sophie. 2015. Transformations in EU Gender Equality. From Emergence 

to Dismantling. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kauppi, Niilo. 2011. EU Politics. In Sociology of the European Union, ed. Adrien 

Favell and Virginie Guiraudon, 150–171. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kingdon, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston: Little, 

Brown and Company.

Kohler-Koch, Beate, and Christine Quittkat, eds. 2011. Die Entzauberung par-
tizipativer Demokratie : zur Rolle der Zivilgesellschaft bei der Demokratisierung 
von EU-Governance. Frankfurt am Main: Campus-Verlag.

 
252 

6  CONCLUSION

Koopmans, Ruud, and Paul Statham, eds. 2010. The Making of a European Public 
Sphere  Media  Discourse  and  Political  Contention.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

Liebert, Ulrike, and Hans-Jörg Trenz. 2009. Civil Society and the Reconstitution 
of Democracy in Europe: Introducing a New Research Field. Policy and Society 
28 (1): 1–9.

MacRae, Heather. 2010. The EU as a Gender Equal Polity: Myths and Realities. 

Journal of Common Market Studies 48 (1): 155–174.

Mahoney,  James.  2000.  Path  Dependence  in  Historical  Sociology.  Theory  and 

Society 29 (4): 507–548.

Marshall, David. 2010. Who to Lobby and When: Institutional Determinants of 
Interest  Group  Strategies  in  European  Parliament  Committees.  European 
Union Politics 11 (4): 553–575.

Ostner, Ilona, and Jane Lewis. 1998. Geschlechterpolitik zwischen europäischer 
und  nationalstaatlicher  Regelung.  In  Standort  Europa:  sozialpolitik  zwischen 
nationalstaat  und  Europäischer  integration,  ed.  Stephan  Leibfried  and  Paul 
Pierson, 196–239. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Prügl, Elisabeth. 2006. Gender and European Union Politics. In Ben Handbook of 
European Union Politics, ed. Knud Erik Jørgensen, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben 
Rosamond, 433–448. London; Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Raiser, Christoph. 2014. Kompromisse im Europäischen Parlament: eine kultursozi-
ologische Analyse von Entscheidungsprozessen in einer supranationalen Institution. 
Potsdam: Universitätsverlag Potsdam.

Statham, Paul, and Hans-Jörg Trenz. 2013. The Politicization of Europe: Contesting 

the Constitution in the Mass Media. New York: Routledge.

Straßheim, Holger. 2011. Netzwerkpolitik: Governance und Wissen im administra-

tiven Austausch. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Woodward,  Alison  E.  2004.  Building  Velvet  Triangles:  Gender  and  Informal 
Governance.  In  Informal  Governance  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Thomas 
Christiansen, 76–93. Cheltenham: Elgar.

———.  2012.  From  Equal  Treatment  to  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  Diversity 
Management.  In  Gendering  the  European  Union:  New  Approaches  to  Old 
Democratic Deficits, ed. Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 85–103. 
Houndmills, Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

 

Annex: Methods And Methodology

Do you have any more questions before we start?

—Start quickly because I really have a very busy day.

(Interview with MEP)

This annex briefly presents the documentary analysis and the way expert 
interviews were set up, conducted and analysed. Gender equality policy- 
making  was  approached  from  a  micro-sociological  perspective.  This 
approach  can  be  best  described  as  qualitative,  inductive  and  theory- 
generating  within  the  broader  context  of  grounded  theory  (Glaser  and 
Strauss 1967). The research is grounded in the everyday work of the inter-
viewees. Human social interactions and agency were investigated within 
the particular group of supranational gender equality actors to make sense 
of their social world.

Expert interviews were the main empirical tool. The interviews were to 
analyse how actors reflect policy-making and its inherent logic and to find 
out  which  kind  of  institutionalised  setting  was  reproduced  in  time  and 
space. Narratives are the means of human sense-making. Therefore, ana-
lysing the narratives with a hermeneutic approach in an iterative process 
improves our understanding of what actors consciously consider relevant 
and how they reflect on processes.

253

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4254   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

I. docuMentAry reseArch

The analysis of primary sources1 of EU institutions, such as the Commission, 
Council, Parliament and other actors in the policy process, is a common 
methodology in EU studies. Research approaches rely on primary sources 
in order to analyse different political positions, changes in policy topics 
and the process of policy-making (Steinmo 2008; Tilly 2006). In general, 
primary sources are used to ‘tell the story’ or ‘recreate a historical sequencing 
of events’ (Vromen 2010: 262) and to follow institutionalised traces (Wolff 
2000: 503). In gender equality policy documentary research is a common 
research method in critical frame analysis where it is often used to analyse 
policy areas, such as employment policies or women trafficking.

The documentary research served four purposes: (1) the collected doc-
uments provided background information on particular dates to provide a 
comprehensive picture of the development of the policy process until the 
adoption  of  the  Roadmap;  (2)  the  documentary  research  informed  the 
presentation of the history of EU gender equality policy; (3) it was neces-
sary to analyse the documents and further connected policy programmes 
(e.g. dAPHNE, PRoGRESS) to understand the context of the Roadmap 
as  a  policy  programme;  (4)  the  results  from  the  documentary  research 
served as background and context for the preparation of the expert inter-
views and questionnaire.

 Documents
documents comprised a variety of sources, such as communications, opin-
ions,  statements,  press  releases  and  websites.  The  number  of  collected 
documents was determined by the publications that were (1) referenced 
by name or as a political strategy in the Roadmap or (2) referenced the 
Roadmap or its activities in their texts.

The  majority  of  documents  covered  the  time  from  2005  to  2008. 
others were published before 2005 and belonged predominantly to those 
documents which were referenced in the Roadmap. The collection cov-
ered a large quantity of documents which were available online and a few 
documents which were provided by interviewees or other sources, such as 
library archives. The publication search consisted of:

•  the Roadmap itself;
•  documents  connected  to  the  formal  adoption  process  of  the 

Roadmap;

  ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy 

 

  255

•  policy documents with their official abbreviation2 in the main text, 

footnotes or annexes of the Roadmap;

•  primary documents of political activities which are named in the text 

corpus, footnotes or annexes of the Roadmap;

•  documents by the following actors that mention the Roadmap as a 

reference in their text corpus, footnotes or annexes:

 – The dGs of the European Commission, the European Council, 
the  European  Parliament,  the  European  Economic  and  Social 
Committee, and the Committee of the Regions.

 – Social Partners, non- governmental organisations and companies.
Most EU documents were available via the websites of the Commission, 
Council,  EP  and  other  actors  (e.g.  Social  Partners).  The  European 
Commission  website  offered  three  search  strategies:  (1)  the  official 
Journal of the European Communities; (2) various websites of different 
directorate  General;  (3)  the  Eur-lex:  Access  to  European  Union  law 
web search. The official Journal delivers the official citations. The dGs 
offer  additional  policy  papers  which  are  not  published  in  the  official 
Journal, but are necessary as a support to understand the policy- making 
process. The Eur-lex shows the timeline and documents which were con-
nected to actors and policy programmes. Every EU publication with an 
official label is available through such websites.

In addition to the web-based research, the EU library in Brussels and 
the publication offices of EU institutions (e.g. EP, CoR, EESC) provided 
additional  documents  that  were  mentioned  in  other  publications,  but 
were  not  available  online.  The  search  started  on  the  website  of  the 
directorate General Employment, Social Affairs and Equal opportunities 
of the European Commission, since it was still in charge of gender equality 
policies in 2006. It offered the most comprehensive overview of links and 
documents relating to gender equality policy-making. In addition, all links 
from dG Employment—e.g. to other directorates General, other institu-
tions or any other kinds of actors, references to gender equality and links 
and documents related to the Roadmap—were followed up.

In order to collect all publications connected to the Roadmap, similar 
searches  on  the  website  of  the  Women’s  Rights  and  Gender  Equality 
Committee  of  the  European  Parliament,  the  European  Council  Section 
‘Employment  and  Social  Affairs’,  the  Committee  of  the  Regions,  the 
European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  websites  of  various 

256   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

NGos and Social Partners were carried out. They did, however, provide 
fewer links and documents. In addition, a keyword search on the central 
terms of the Roadmap (e.g. economic independence, gender based vio-
lence, stereotype) on CoRdIS (http://cordis.europa.eu) was conducted.

 Analytical Steps of Documentary Research
The production of EU documents follows certain rules and the actors who 
were involved followed certain procedures and processes. The order of doc-
uments can be conceptualised as a regulated dialogue (Wolff 2000) between 
the  different 
institutions  and  organisations,  representing  structure. 
Individuals are aware of certain rules (depending on their knowledgeability 
and  location)  inside  their  institution.  Therefore,  they  can  schedule  their 
involvement in the institutional dialogue. The Roadmap, for instance, was 
published on International Women’s day (March 8), an important date for 
the policy area and its actors. In this sense connected documents can also be 
conceptualised  as  representations  of  structure  and  the  content,  rules  and 
resources which were provided for the policy area at a certain point in time. 
When  analysing  an  official  document  it  needs  to  be  treated  with  care, 
because ‘the information that it provides tends to cast the department and its 
ministers in a favourable way’ (McCulloch 2004: 38). How were the publi-
cations ordered over time in regard to the policy process? The answer lies in 
the idea of historiography as the ‘writing of history based on a selective, critical 
reading of sources that synthesizes particular bits of information into a narra-
tive description or analysis of a subject’ (Thies 2002: 351). documents also 
provided the exact publication dates because interviewees seldom stated the 
exact dates of documents. Sometimes such dates were important to ascertain 
when actors had access to a specific document during the policy process.

First, I compared the relevant policy issues, legislation, actors, policy 

goals and accountability by asking:

•  what exactly was formulated; e.g. what were the terms and wording 
used in title and text body, what was the cited legislative context, the 
types of institutions and organisations which were assigned for spe-
cific tasks, what were the set targets or benchmarks, what was the 
dedicated budget and what were the review tools;

•  if the aspect has changed since the previous programme; e.g. in terms 

of successive activities, new actions or actors;

•  if the results pointed to improvement or deterioration.

  ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy 

 

  257

The results helped to complete the history of gender equality policy 
and provided the background to the questionnaire and expert interviews.
Publications of specific Roadmap activities from the Commission dGs 
and by actors other than the Commission were analysed. First, all docu-
ments  derived  from  the  Commission  in  relation  to  the  Roadmap  were 
searched for topic- specific keywords, such as gender, women, men, equal 
and discrimination. In addition, specific terms related to priority action 
areas of the Roadmap and connected programmes, such as ‘Investing in 
youth’ or ‘Plan d’, were analysed. The keyword search was an indicator 
for  accountability—whether  an  activity  of  the  Roadmap  was  actually 
implemented or just lip service. The key idea was: if something is men-
tioned in the Roadmap, we should at least expect to find a smaller refer-
ence to gender equality in the subsequent documents of the Roadmap. 
This means that if there were no links to gender equality (or similar key-
words, such as ‘equal opportunities’) we can expect that nothing will be 
implemented with regard to gender equality. The results of this analysis 
provided  the  background  to  the  development  of  the  questionnaire  and 
expert interviews.

II. expert IntervIews

Expert interviews were useful for understanding the duality of structure: 
the way in which actors interacted within a certain structure, how they 
shaped the structure and how they were, at the same time, constrained 
or enabled by the surrounding structure. The analysis of expert inter-
views  helped  to  explain  and  track  changes  at  the  level  of  actors.  This 
included changes to their previous collaboration, their knowledgeability 
and capability, the level of structure, e.g. the role of rules and resources 
as aspects of routines. Interviewees constructed narratives of their role in 
the policy process and the way in which the policy process was struc-
tured.  Their  everyday  working  life,  personal  views,  origin  and  gender 
influenced the retrospective narratives of interviewees. They shared dif-
ferent narratives about EU gender equality policy, e.g. as a story of sta-
bility,  retrenchment  or  progress.  Comparing  narratives  was  critical, 
because  the  stories  implied  explanations  for  the  success  and  failure  of 
gender  equality  policy-making.  In  addition,  the  narratives  were  com-
pared to the context which was extracted by applying the second method: 
documentary research.

258   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

 Purpose and Conceptualisation of Expert Interviews
Interviewees produce common narratives or ‘standard stories’ (Tilly 2002) 
which are coherently interwoven with a certain institutional logic and its 
norms and rules. The narratives about the policy process can be analysed 
in order to find similarities, differences and narrative patterns.

Expert3 interviews are common in sociology and political science and 
can serve different functions. They can help to quickly explore the research 
subject, they can limit the otherwise high number of interviews by select-
ing a variety of actors or open up access to the research area and future 
interviews (Bogner and Menz 2005: 7–9). Political experts in particular 
are ‘gatekeepers to a considerable amount of information (…) not available 
through official channels’ (Sarikakis 2003: 434).

Expert  interviews  are  a  specific  connection  of  a  customised  method 
with a specific sample group rather than a specific method. In this context, 
expert interviews served the purpose of reconstructing a social situation 
(Gläser and laudel 2009): the policy process surrounding the Roadmap. 
likewise, experts performed a double role as professionals and individuals 
(Abels and Behrens 2005: 175–176). This means that even though experts 
act as individuals in interviews, they are not of interest as a private person 
as such. Selecting the samples is justified because we can, for instance, take 
for  granted  that  members  of  the  Committee  for  Women’s  Rights  and 
Gender Equality (FEMM) in the European Parliament possess the neces-
sary ‘social relevance’ (Bogner and Menz 2005: 45f).

In  this  study  expert  interviews  were  conceptualised  in  view  of  their 
theory-generating  function  as  the  interview  focused  on  the  ‘subjective 
dimension’ of experts concerning their individual reasons for actions and 
their  implicit  basis  of  decision- making  (Bogner  and  Menz  2005:  38). 
Expert interviews with semi- structured questionnaires are the most appro-
priate method when the interview includes diverse topics which are shaped 
by the research question. They are also relevant when details about indi-
vidual and implicit decisions are only available through the experts (Gläser 
and laudel 2009: 111).

The method of using semi- structured, narrative expert interviews relies 
on the participation of a particular person in a particular context of action 
who  reflects  the  main  criterion  of  the  applicability,  as  Schütze  (1977) 
pointed out. In this case the specific context is the participation of a person 
in the policy process in connection with the Roadmap. In particular civil 
servants are experts, as they acquire ‘insider knowledge’ (Merton 1972) or 
‘spezialisiertes Sonderwissen’ (Meuser and Nagel 2004). In comparison to  

  ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy 

 

  259

the general public experts tend to have more crystallised views on political 
topics and seldom show attitude softness (Jennings 1992). EU civil ser-
vants  are  used  to  ‘Euro-speak’  (diez  2001),  i.e.  speaking  in  public  and 
defending the politics of their institution. My interviewees were familiar 
with interviews; they had probably encountered similar questions to those 
in the questionnaire often before and were prepared to answer inconve-
nient or open questions.

 Sampling
Experts were initially generated by a ‘decisional method’ (Mérand 2011), 
i.e. individual actors were selected by organisational charts, so-called gate-
keepers.  Afterwards,  a  snowball  system  completed  the  expert  search 
through  matching  the  sample  while  processing  the  data  collection.  No 
reliable information was available in advance in relation to the number of 
persons, their location and relevance in the policy process. Therefore, a 
snowball system provided the best solution to cover the maximum poten-
tial research population. This involved previous interviewees who defined 
other experts within the policy process by labelling him/her as a partici-
pant. Therefore, experts and their knowledge were an ‘analytical construc-
tion’4  (Bogner  and  Menz  2005:  43).  Consequently,  experts  were 
predominantly  defined  by  their  participation  in  the  process  of  gender 
equality policy-making and not exclusively by possessing a certain institu-
tional function.

Experts  often  come  from  lower  and  middle  hierarchies  and  seldom 
from the top level as they perform a certain function and present solutions 
to  problems  and  the  decision- making  level  (Meuser  and  Nagel  2005; 
Abels and Behrens 2005). Career civil servants are central in understand-
ing  the  overall  policy  process;  they  stay,  while  the  political  level,  e.g. 
Commissioners  and  the  members  of  their  cabinet  change  frequently 
(Hooghe 2005).

 Pitfalls of Chosen Expert Definition
People are often biased about male and female power and show a tendency 
to connect the term ’expert’ to higher positions in the hierarchy (littig 
2005). For instance, we know from social movement studies that people 
tend to overestimate men’s roles and underestimate women’s roles in the 
movement (dörr 2007). on the whole, we need to pay attention to who 
is considered an expert, and why and who possesses the normative power 
in gender equality policy.

260   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

Some may argue that the analytical construction of experts used in this 
study may have favoured a narrow, male understanding of ‘experts’ when 
linking experts with formal responsibility. To avoid such a bias I decided 
not  to  ask  the  interviewees  about  further  ‘experts’  in  the  field.  Instead 
they were asked about ‘good persons to talk to in order to get a broad pic-
ture’. This general request opened up the possibility to include those who 
might be useful for the study, rather than sticking to institutional settings 
or formal responsibilities.

However, in the final sample the analytical construction of experts cer-
tainly risked excluding those who were not recognised or accepted by the 
dominant actors within the policy area, such as lGBT groups, migrant 
organisations, etc. They were not excluded on purpose; in fact, they were 
omitted  because  interviewees  never  mentioned  them.  If  they  had  been 
mentioned they would have been included. Their aims and activities to 
influence  gender  equality  policy  are  unquestioned.  However,  the  other 
participants  in  the  policy  process  did  not  consider  them  as  actors  since 
recognised participation in the policy process was the criterion for being 
included in the interviews.

 Interaction Between Researcher and Interviewee
Interviews are a specifically constructed complex situation of social inter-
action.  They  imply  a  particular  management  task  for  the  interviewer, 
because all interview participants are subjects and human beings (Gläser 
and  laudel  2009).  Both  participants—researcher  and  interviewee—
implicitly  attribute  roles,  characteristics  and  competences  to  each  other 
and the interactions are influenced by interests, trust, power and control 
(Abels  and  Behrens  2005:  175).  These  aspects  influence  the  interview 
atmosphere and require the researcher to be empathic and understand the 
roles that participants occupy. The aim is to stage a comfortable, fruitful 
atmosphere (Hermanns 2000: 364) and to produce an interview where 
the transcript can function as a monologue (lamnek 1989). According to 
Hermanns (2000: 361), researchers face three dilemmas in interviews: (1) 
the vagueness of the interview set-up versus the need to collect significant 
material regarding the research question; (2) interest in collecting a great 
deal of specific and often personal information versus respecting privacy; 
(3)  the  researcher’s  existing  knowledge  versus  curious  impartiality  as  a 
precondition for an open interview situation.

According to Bogner and Menz, every statement in an interview shapes 
the interaction between the researcher and interviewee and statements of 

  ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy 

 

  261

interviewees  are  always  statements  ‘for’  the  researcher  within  a  specific 
situation (Bogner and Menz 2005: 48). In such a specific situation, inter-
viewees constantly reflect upon the interview situation and react to it, con-
sciously or unconsciously, as does the interviewer.

Also  researchers  cannot  avoid  socio-structural  and  situational  factors 
which are verbally and non- verbally reproduced, such as age, gender, pro-
fessional status or opinions5 (Abels and Behrens 2005: 177). In fact, gen-
der and age play a particular role in interviews (Behnke and Meuser 1999; 
littig 2005). While such influences cannot be avoided, they can nonethe-
less be anticipated and critically screened during the research process. As a 
young female scientist, the author occasionally perceived gender-specific 
attributions that cross-cut the general challenges, e.g. when an older male 
civil  servant  elaborated  extensively  on  the  basic  functioning  of  the  EU 
system and its possible pitfalls in a paternalistic attitude (Abels and Behrens 
2005: 182).

 Questionnaire Development and Application
developing a questionnaire reflects a crucial element of the research pro-
cess, as it shapes the way in which interviews are conducted, as well as the 
data  that  is  ultimately  obtained.  Hopf’s  (1978:  99–101)  consideration 
provided four central standards which were followed in this study:

•  Scope: the spectrum of possible answers must be as wide as possible 
to avoid anticipated answers. Questions should not simply interro-
gate  factors;  instead,  they  should  function  as  narrative-stimulating 
questions.

•  Specification: questions should lead to detailed answers from the per-

spective of the interviewee, as opposed to standardised answers.

•  Depth: questions should support the interviewee in portraying his or 
her involvement in the affective, cognitive and value-related impor-
tance of the researched process.

•  Personal context: the personal and social context of the interviewee 

needs to be known and acknowledged.

In  addition,  questions  needed  to  be  ‘open’,  neutral,  clear  and  simple 
(Gläser and laudel 2009: 131–142) in order to produce reliable narratives.
The  interview  strategy  was  to  provide  sufficient  space  for  experts  to 
develop their narratives about the Roadmap and EU gender equality pol-
icy.  Based  on  theoretical  reflections,  a  thorough  reading  of  research  

262   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

literature and discussions with colleagues, a semi- structured questionnaire 
covered the five broad issue areas (1) interviewee work description, (2) 
organisation/actor  description,  (3)  Roadmap  negotiations,  (4),  actors 
constellation, and (5) EU integration process.

The questionnaire included ‘stimuli’ questions for each issue area, back-
up questions depending on the first answer, as well as further potential 
questions (Corbin and Strauss 2008: 28). It was meant as a guideline for 
the interview without excluding additional topics or necessarily sticking to 
the  order  of  questions  (Gläser  and  laudel  2009).  After  the  interview, 
every interviewee was asked to sign a consent form about data protection 
and  complete  a  data  questionnaire  on  socio-structural  aspects,  such  as 
number of colleagues, hierarchical position, occupation, education, etc.

 Practical Interview Process
Interviewees were contacted by personal email, announcing a telephone 
call during the coming days and requesting further information and a face-
to-face  interview.  The  majority  of  the  contacted  persons  reacted  to  the 
email within a short time; many responded even before the announced 
telephone call, some firmly expressed their interest in the interview, while 
only a few rejected an interview.

From  March  to  July  2008  thirty- three  expert  interviews  were  con-
ducted  in  the  European  Commission,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
European Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, with 
members of different NGos, Commission expert groups, Social Partners 
and interinstitutional groups.

The number of ‘necessary’ interviews was intentionally left open. By 
contrast,  four  qualitative  goals  were  used  to  guarantee  content- related 
representativeness.  Interviews  should:  (1)  be  distributed  over  different 
levels of hierarchy; (2) cover researched policy areas; (3) represent persons 
from  different  types  of  organisations;  (4)  be  conducted  until  no  new 
actors,  persons  or  institutions  were  mentioned.  Contacts  and  interview 
appointments were kept in two different password-protected files to secure 
anonymity. Audio files were stored via a password-protected online stor-
age and deleted from the tape within two days after recording.

Thirty-two interviews were in- depth interviews which lasted thirty to 
three hundred minutes, with an average of ninety minutes. The goal was 
to stimulate memory (Corbin and Strauss 2008) and grasp the interview-
ees’ experience and the meaning they assigned to their everyday work and 
thoughts  about  gender  equality  policy-making.  Thirty-one  interviews 

  ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy 

 

  263

were taped,6 simultaneously recorded in writing and entirely transcribed. 
The author produced an interview protocol which collected underlying 
data, such as age, country of origin, interview atmosphere and special fea-
tures  like  access  to  the  interview  and  interview  interaction  (including 
avoidance of topics).

 Final Sample
The interviews started with online directories and a keyword search. The 
majority of interviewees of the final sample are not visible or searchable via 
such online directories. Therefore, it would have been impossible to find 
them  without  snowball  sampling.  In  conclusion,  the  majority  of  actors 
who were involved in gender equality policy were not visible and easily 
identifiable from the outside. The distribution of the thirty-three inter-
views is illustrated in the following table.

Overview Interview Distribution

Actor

Number of 
interviews

Function or organisation

Number of 
interviews

European Commission

12

European Parliament

Member states

other institutions and 
organisations

8

4

9

Management level
Policy advisors
MEP
Civil servant
Coreper
Interinstitutional group
NGos
Social Partners
Expert groups
EESC

4
8
5
3
1
3
4
2
2
1

Female  interviewees  showed  no  particular  pattern:  they  covered  all  age 
groups—more or less equally—and worked at all levels of responsibility. 
Around one-fifth of the interviewees were male and all of them worked 
within the EP or the Commission. They covered all age groups, but were 
slightly underrepresented in the policy core group. All interviewees held a 
university degree, were white and—as far as it can be derived from the 
information available—did not have a migration background. Interviewees 
from  NGos  and  Social  Partners  tended  to  belong  to  the  youngest  age 
groups (below 34 and 35–44), while the representatives of expert groups 
belonged to the oldest age group (above 55).

264   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

 Ethical Questions
A cover letter with the invitation included a paragraph assuring that all 
information would be treated confidentially and would solely be used for 
scientific  analysis  and  related  publications.  It  also  stated  that  the  inter-
viewee and his/her colleagues could not be identified by name; the inter-
view  would  be  anonymous  and  deleted  after  the  end  of  the  research 
project. Interviewees who named a potential interviewee where asked for 
permission to include their name in the cover letter. After every interview 
an informed consent7 was signed by the interviewee. during transcription 
all individual names were deleted or exchanged by acronyms by the author, 
apart  from  those  concerning  a  public  figure,  such  as  the  Commission 
President or a Commissioner. In order to assure full anonymity, quota-
tions in the empirical chapters were only broadly marked with the organ-
isation and not with single departments, political parties or organisations. 
Quotations in the empirical chapters only show original statements, while 
other statements were paraphrased to protect anonymity.

III. codIng And AnAlysIng expert IntervIews

Grounded theory provided the basis for coding data. This method is now-
adays  also  used  independent  of  grounded  theory  (Gläser  and  laudel 
2009). Such an approach allows generating a ‘thick description’, analysing 
a single case and studying policy processes from a feminist, interpretivist 
perspective (Vromen 2010: 249). Grounded theory is a micro-sociologi-
cal approach that enables generating a meta-theoretical explanation which 
is  grounded  in  data  (Creswell  2013),  a  ‘unified  theoretical  explanation’ 
(Corbin and Strauss 2008: 107) which is shaped by the views of interview-
ees. It allows the focus on a dynamic process, an action over time.

Coding interview transcripts involves the application of particular labels 
to appropriate units of data, whereby codes are the names for concepts at 
any level of analysis. Coding is a technical task and requires the organisa-
tion of data. It is neither analysing nor interpreting, it rather contributes 
to organising data in a way that it becomes interpretable. This study used 
atlasTi, a scientific software for textual analysis to code and analyse the text 
corpus of the interviews.

The process of coding data can be best described as a combination of 
‘open coding’ and ‘axial coding’ (Strauss and Corbin 1998). The practical 
process  involves  reading,  coding  and  conceptualising  the  material  by 

  ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy 

 

  265

 constantly  comparing  and  contrasting  the  coded  material.  It  thereby 
reduces the raw data and concepts to the overarching categories.

 Coding Process and First Analysis
While many research projects employ a deductive top-down approach and 
define concepts and their dimensions in advance before they subsequently 
code along the developed concepts, this study combined a top-down and 
bottom- up approach based on grounded theory. A bottom-up approach 
means developing concepts and their dimensions inductively while cod-
ing. However, it is not possible to analyse data without having ideas about 
possible  explanations.  Thus,  the  starting  point  for  coding  in  the  study 
relied on aspects from the literature review which were derived from the 
documentary research and the thematic areas of the questionnaire.

The study commenced with a process characterised as ‘open coding’ 
and  went  through  every  single  interview  in  turn,  coding  text  segments 
that either belonged to the aforementioned factors or could be labelled 
with a name drawn from data, so-called in-vivo-codes (Corbin and Strauss 
2008: 65). Even though some of the labels from the deductive codes were 
stable, the narratives often differed from the expected content and resulted 
in a redefinition of the code. The same applies to inductive codes.

The  coding  was  initially  fractioned  and  often  did  not  differentiate 
whether a certain text segment was a code, a dimension belonging to a 
code or a concept. After a number of interviews, some codes were con-
nected into so-called code families in atlasTi. The review of dimensions, 
codes, code families and concepts was scheduled periodically in rotation 
with reading and revising memos.

Along the coding process the author explored the relationship between 
different concepts which either belonged to structure or content, a pro-
cess which was termed ‘axial coding’ by Strauss and Corbin. It led to more 
abstract  concepts,  so-called  categories  (Corbin  and  Strauss  2008: 
195–199). Categories ‘represent relevant phenomena and enable the analyst 
to reduce and combine data’ (Corbin and Strauss 2008: 159). They are the 
core concepts of the study and supplied the basis for the empirical chap-
ters. Transversal code families on sex, age and institutional affiliation were 
set up in order to discover possible gendered effects and analyse text seg-
ments regarding specific institutional rules and resources.

While atlasTi helps to categorise data along concepts and dimensions, it 
is less useful when aiming to find specific characteristics. These are often 

266   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

overseen during coding, because they only occur a few times or as a sub-
text of the whole interview. To compensate for the risk of missing specific 
characteristics the author regularly read all interviews as a complete text, 
marking specific characteristics. For instance, the aim was to look for ‘neg-
ative cases’  or  contradictions  of  one  interview  to  all  others,  in  order  to 
allow a fuller exploration of concepts (Corbin and Strauss 2008: 84). This 
provided the chance to add puzzle pieces to overarching questions and 
topics which were particularly important to individual interviewees, but 
also to one or more concepts in general.

 From Coding to Analysis and Interpretation
The  most  important  decision  during  the  analysis  was  to  divide  codes 
according  to  their  relevance  to  actors’  actions,  aspects  of  structure  and 
content. This allowed the three times analysis of codes and answers to the 
three overarching questions. In order to develop and define the codes and 
establish an understanding of different narratives, the study asked ‘who, 
what, when, where, how and with what consequences’ (Corbin and Strauss 
2008), while constantly comparing the results. The study focused on time 
(sequence, timing, duration) and space (where, open or closed group).

The actors’ actions, interactions and perceptions which were described 
by  individuals  were  analysed  before  subsequently  developing  an  early 
model  of  their  perception  and  reflection  of  the  Roadmap.  At  the  same 
time another model was developed in relation to the ‘core and periphery 
of gender equality policy actors’. The codes for actors functioned as a col-
lection  of  sequential  events  and  descriptive  statements.  The  pulling 
together of the policy process over the course of time relied on descriptive, 
quasi- factual  statements  of  all  interviewees  who  participated  in  the 
Roadmap. The code brought together the information from every single 
interview and allowed the development of a thick description of the policy 
process, including contradictory and similar narratives. Accordingly, the 
descriptive codes helped to carry out a sequential analysis of the policy 
process.

A second kind of codes and concepts—codes that contained implicit or 
explicit interpretations and explanations by interviewees—were analysed 
in a different way. All quotations of one code were compiled and com-
pared in order to find text segments that contained similar explanations or 
interpretations in answering how actors interpreted and constructed the 
Roadmap policy process. The codes for structure functioned as a  collection 

  NoTES 

 

  267

of  interpretative  and  explanatory  elements  which  were  implicit  in  the 
statements  of  the  interviewees  and  derived  by  open  coding  and  axial 
coding.

In terms of structure, the focus was on formal and informal rules and 
procedures,  because  they  provided  the  context  for  the  actors  and  their 
routines. during this analysis two different levels of rules and resources 
occurred that were connected with different spaces for the actors. on the 
one hand, there were the daily routines within their home institution as 
part of their working environment. These steered the everyday, routine 
actions of the actors and all interviewees reflected upon them implicitly or 
explicitly when describing their work and organisation. The second set of 
rules was connected to a broader level, e.g. the level of EU integration 
itself. These rules encompassed enlargements, the discourse on new public 
management or the power structure between different supranational insti-
tutions, such as the Council, Parliament and the Commission.

Against the background of the reconstructed process it was possible to 
analyse who knew what, at what point in time, and how actors perceived 
the  process  in  a  particular  way,  how  they  entered  the  process  and  with 
what knowledge. This was necessary for answering how different actors 
judged the policy implications of the Roadmap. The policy implication of 
the Roadmap was a code that neither fell into the category of actor, struc-
ture  nor  content;  it  reflected  how  actors  in  a  specific  structural  setting 
perceived the same subject in a different way.

 
 1.  Primary sources are defined as original documents which are produced by 
any kind of political actor, as well as archival material, such as meeting notes, 
press releases or speeches (McCulloch 2004).

notes

 2.  All official publications of the European Union are identified by a so- called 
CElEx  number  and  a  unique  abbreviation  of  the  document  sector  (e.g. 
treaties,  secondary  legislation,  preparatory  acts,  parliamentary  questions), 
year of publication, consecutive number and sometimes status. The CElEx 
for the Roadmap is 5 2006 dC 0092. Read: 5=Preparatory acts, 2006=year 
of  publication,  dC=other  Commission  documents,  0092=consecutive 
number. The ’Roadmap’ has also the unique abbreviation CoM (2006) 92 
final. Read: Published by the Commission, in the year 2006 as number 92, 
final version.

 3.  Expert interviews are sometimes also referred to as elite or specialised inter-
views. For methodological discussions, please refer to Bogner et al. (2005).

268   ANNEx: METHodS ANd METHodoloGy

 4.  The term ‘expert’ is not only an ‘analytical construction’ it is also a relational 
conceptualisation (Bogner and Menz 2005). Who is considered an expert 
must be derived from the theoretical framing of the research and not by 
choosing ‘expert interviews’ as a method (deeke 1995).

 5.  Sarikakis (2003) provides a very comprehensive account of the cross-cutting 
effects of gender, age, and ethnicity combined with research on EU politics 
and elite interviews.

 6.  one  more  interview  was  a  recollection  of  the  conversation,  because  the 
recording failed, while the remaining one was conducted via email exchange.
 7.  The informed consent was largely derived from the example provided by 

Helfferich (2005: 203).

references

Abels, Gabriele. 2011. Gender Equality Policy. In Policies within the EU Multi- 
Level System. Instruments and Strategies of European Governance, ed. Hubert 
Heinelt and Michèle Knodt, 325–348. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

———. 2016. Multi-level Governance: Tailoring a ‘Favourite Coat’ to the Needs 
of  ‘Gender  Fashion’.  In  Gendering  European  Integration  Theory.  Engaging 
New Dialogues, ed. Gabriele Abels and Heather MacRae, 99–121. opladen, 
Berlin & Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.

Abels,  Gabriele,  and  Maria  Behrens.  2005.  ExpertInnen-Interviews  in  der 
Politikwissenschaft.  Geschlechtertheoretische  und  politikfeldanalytische 
Reflexion  einer  Methode.  In  Das  Experteninterview.  Theorie,  Methode, 
Anwendung,  ed.  Alexander  Bogner,  Beate  littig,  and  Wolfgang  Menz, 
173–190. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Abels, Gabriele, and Heather MacRae, eds. 2016. Gendering European Integration 
Theory. Engaging New Dialogues. opladen, Berlin & Toronto: Barbara Budrich 
Publishers.

Abels,  Gabriele,  and  Joyce  Marie  Mushaben.  2012a.  Gendering  the  European 
Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits. Houndmills, Basingstoke; 
New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

———.  2012b.  Introduction:  Studying  the  EU  from  a  Gender  Perspective.  In 
Gendering the European Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits, ed. 
Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 1–21. Houndmills, Basingstoke; 
New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Acker, Joan. 1990. Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A Theory of Gendered organizations. 

Gender & Society 2: 139–158.

269

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4270 

  REFERENCES

21 (5): 565–569.

———. 1992. From Sex Roles to Gendered Institutions. Contemporary Sociology 

Ahrens,  Petra.  2002.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  der  Beschäftigungspolitik  der 
Europäischen  Union  –  Im  Spannungsfeld  feministischer  Theorien  und  poli-
tischer Praxis. Thesis, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Hamburg: diplomica.
———.  2005.  Top-down-Umsetzung  von  Gender  Mainstreaming.  Berlin: 
GenderKompetenzZentrum.  Accessed  october  1,  2013.  http://www.gen-
derkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/topdown.pdf.

———.  2007.  Gleichstellungspolitik  in  der  Europäischen  Union.  Expertise  im 

Auftrag der Bundestagsfraktion dIE lINKE, ed. Berlin.

———.  2008.  More  Actors  Butter  No  Parsnips:  Gaining  Insights  into  Gender 
Equality Programs of the European Union. 4th Pan-European Conference on 
EU Politics, University of latvia, 25–27 September 2008, Riga, latvia.

———. 2011. Gender Equality Policy Networks in the European Union and the 

Utility of Qualitative Network Analysis. BGSS Working Paper No. 04/2011.

———. 2013. diffuse Barriers to Gender Equality: The occurrence of Indirect 
opposition.  7th  ECPR  General  Conference,  Sciences  Po  Bordeaux,  4–7 
September 2013.

———.  2015.  das  Ende  einer  Ära?  Gleichstellungspolitische  Programme  der 

Europäischen Union. femina politica 24 (2): 105–109.

———. 2016. The Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality – Taking 
Advantage of Institutional Power Play. Parliamentary Affairs 69 (4): 778–793. 
doi:10.1093/pa/gsw005.

Ahrens,  Petra,  and  Jochen  Geppert.  2005.  Gender  Mainstreaming  als 
Organisationsentwicklung, text version of the eponymous speech, Conference 
“Implementierung von Gender Mainstreaming in der öffentlichen Verwaltung – 
Chancen  und  Herausforderungen  der  organisationsentwicklung”,  June  27, 
2005, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Gender KompetenzZentrum. Accessed 
october 
2013.  www.genderkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/
vortrag_gm_als_oe.pdf.

1, 

Ahrens,  Petra,  and  Sandra  lewalter.  2005.  Möglichkeiten  der  Steuerung  bei  der 
Umsetzung von Gender Mainstreaming im Übergang zur Regelpraxis, text ver-
sion  of  the  eponymous  speech,  Conference  “Implementierung  von  Gender 
Mainstreaming 
in  der  öffentlichen  Verwaltung  –  Chancen  und 
Herausforderungen  der  organisationsentwicklung”, 
June  27,  2005. 
Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin,  Gender  KompetenzZentrum.  Accessed 
october 1, 2013. www.genderkompetenz.info/w/files/gkompzpdf/vortrag_
steuerungsmöglichkeiten.pdf.

———.  2006.  das  Europäische  Institut  für  Gleichstellungsfragen  –  Was  lange 

währt wird endlich gut? femina politica 2: 124–127.

Ahrens, Petra, and Anna van der Vleuten. 2017. EU Gender Equality Policies and 
Politics  –  New  Modes  of  Governance.  In  Gender  and  Diversity  Studies  in 

  REFERENCES 

 

  271

European  Perspectives,  ed.  Carola  Bauschke- Urban  and  Ingrid  Jungwirth. 
opladen: Barbara Budrich.

Amiraux, Valérie, and Virginie Guiraudon. 2010. discrimination in Comparative 
Perspective:  Policies  and  Practices.  American  Behavioral  Scientist  53  (12): 
1691–1714.

Anderson, James E. 2010. Public Policymaking. An Introduction. 7th ed. Boston: 

Wadsworth.

Bee, Cristiano, and Emanuela Bozzini, eds. 2010. Mapping the European Public 

Sphere: Institutions, Media and Civil Society. Farnham: Ashgate.

Behnke, Cornelia, and Michael Meuser. 1999. Geschlechterforschung und qualita-

tive Methoden. opladen: leske & Budrich.

Benschop,  yvonne,  and  Hans  dorrewaard.  1998.  Covered  by  Equality:  The 

Gender Subtext of organizations. Organization Studies 19 (5): 787–806.

Berghahn,  Sabine.  1998.  Zwischen  marktvermittelter  Geschlechtergleichheit  im 
europäischen  “Herrenclub”  und  den  patriarchalischen  Traditionalismen  von 
Mitgliedsstaaten:  Gibt 
europäischen 
Gleichheitsentwicklung für Frauen?’. femina politica 7 (2): 46–55.

“Mehrwert” 

einen 

der 

es 

Berghahn, Sabine, and Maria Wersig. 2005. Einflüsse des Europäischen Rechts auf 
die  Geschlechterverhältnisse  und  andere  Diskriminierungsgründe,  genderpoli-
tikonline,  Berlin.  http://web.fu-berlin.de/gpo/pdf/tagungen/eurorecht_
geschl_bergh_wers.pdf.

Beveridge, Fiona. 2007. Building Against the Past: The Impact of Mainstreaming 

on EU Gender law and Policy. European Law Review 32: 193–212.

Beveridge, Fiona, and Samantha Velluti. 2008a. Gender and the Open Method of 
Coordination:  Perspectives  on  Law,  Governance  and  Equality  in  the  EU. 
Aldershot: Ashgate.

———. (2008b). Gender and the oMC: Conclusion and Prospects. In Gender 
and  the  Open  Method  of  Coordination:  Perspectives  on  Law,  Governance  and 
Equality  in  the  EU,  ed.  Fiona  Beveridge  and  Samantha  Velluti,  191–208. 
Adlershot: Ashgate.

Beyers, Jan, Rainer Eising, and William Maloney, eds. 2008. Special Issue: The 
Politics  of  organised  Interests  in  Europe:  lessons  from  EU  Studies  and 
Comparative Politics. West European Politics 31 (6): 1103–1128.

Bogner,  Alexander,  Beate  littig,  and  Wolfgang  Menz,  eds.  2005.  Das 
Experteninterview.  Theorie,  Methode,  Anwendung.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag  für 
Sozialwissenschaften.

Bogner,  Alexander,  and  Wolfgang  Menz.  2005.  das  theoriegenerierende 
Experteninterview.  Erkenntnisinteresse,  Wissensformen,  Interaktion.  In  Das 
Experteninterview. Theorie, Methode, Anwendung, ed. Alexander Bogner, Beate 
littig, and Wolfgang Menz, 33–70. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 

New york: Routledge.

272   REFERENCES

———. 2005. Die männliche Herrschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Braithwaite,  Mary.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Commission: 

Explaining the Roller Coaster of Progress and Regression. Brussels: Engender.

Bretherton,  Charlotte.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  EU  Enlargement: 
the  Tide?  Journal  of  European  Public  Policy  8  

Swimming  against 
(1): 60–81.

Bretherton,  Charlotte,  and  liz  Sperling.  1996.  Women’s  Networks  and  the 
European Union: Towards an Inclusive Approach? Journal of Common Market 
Studies 4: 487–508.

Bryant, Christopher, and david Jary (ed.), (2001a), The Contemporary Giddens: 

Social Theory in a Globalizing Age. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

———. (2001b). Anthony Giddens: A Global Social Theorist. In The Contemporary 
Giddens: Social Theory in a Globalizing Age, ed. Christopher Bryant and david 
Jary, 3–41. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Büchs, Milena. 2007. New Governance in European Social Policy: The Open Method 

of Coordination. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Butler,  Judith.  1990.  Gender  Trouble  Feminism  and  the  Subversion  of  Identity. 

New york: Routledge.

Büttner, Sebastian M., lucia leopold, Steffen Mau, and Matthias Posvic. 2015. 
Professionalization in EU Policy-Making? The Typology of the Transnational 
Field of EU Affairs. European Societies 17 (4): 569–592.

Caporaso, James A., and Joseph Jupille. 2001. The Europeanization of Gender 
Equality Policy and domestic Structural Chance. In Transforming Europe, ed. 
Maria Green Cowles, James A. Caporaso, and Thomas Risse-Kappen, 21–43. 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Carrington, Peter J., John Scott, and Stanley Wasserman, eds. 2005. Models and 

Methods in Social Network Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cavaghan,  Rosalind.  2012.  Gender  Mainstreaming  as  a  Knowledge  Process: 
Towards an Understanding of Perpetuation and Change in Gender Blindness 
and Gender Bias. Phd thesis, University of Edinburgh.

Chappell, louise. 2006. Comparing Political Institutions: Revealing the Gendered 

“logic of Appropriateness”. Politics & Gender 2 (2): 223–235.

———.  2010.  Comparative  Gender  and  Institutions:  directions  for  Research. 

Perspectives on Politics 8 (1): 183–189.

Chappell, louise, and Georgina Waylen. 2013. Gender and the Hidden life of 

Institutions. Public Administration 91 (3): 599–615.

Checkel,  Jeffrey  T.  1998.  The  Constructivist  Turn  in  International  Relations 

Theory. World Politics 50: 324–348.

———. 2005. International Institutions and Socialization in Europe: Introduction 

and Framework. International Organization 59 (4): 801–826.

Christiansen, Thomas, and Simona Piattoni, eds. 2004. Informal Governance and 

the European Union. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

  REFERENCES 

 

  273

Christiansen,  Thomas,  Knud  Erik  Jørgensen,  and  Antje  Wiener.  2001. 
Introduction. In The Social Construction of Europe, ed. Thomas Christiansen, 
Knud Erik Jørgensen, and Antje Wiener, 1–19. london: Sage.

Cichowski, Rachel A. 2001. Judicial Rulemaking and the Institutionalization of 
European Union Sex Equality Policy. In The Institutionalization of Europe, ed. 
Alec  Stone  Sweet,  Wayne  Sandholtz,  and  Neil  Fligstein,  112–136.  oxford: 
oxford University Press.

Civil Society Contact Group. 2006. Making Your Voice Heard in the EU: A Guide 

for NGOs. Brussels: CSCG.

Coen, david, and Jeremy J. Richardson. 2009. Lobbying the European Union insti-

tutions, Actors, and Issues. oxford: oxford University Press.

Cohen, Michael d., James G. March, and Johan P. olsen. 1972. A Garbage Can 
Model of organizational Choice. Administrative Science Quarterly 17 (1): 1–25.
Connell, Raewyn. 1987. Gender and Power: Society, the Person and Sexual Politics. 

Cambridge: Polity Press.

———. 1995. Masculinities. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Corbett, Richard, Francis Jacobs, and Michael Shackleton. (2011). The European 

Parliament: 8th. Rev. ed. london: John Harper Publishing.

Corbin, Juliet, and Anselm Strauss. 2008. Basics of Qualitative Research. Techniques 

and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

Council  of  Europe/Group  of  Specialists  on  Mainstreaming.  1999.  Gender 
Mainstreaming. Conceptual Framework, Methodology and Presentation of Good 
Practice. Final report of Activities of the Group of Specialists on Mainstreaming 
(EG-S-MS). Summary. EC (99) 3. Strasbourg.

Creswell,  John  W.  2013.  Qualitative  Inquiry  and  Research  Design.  Choosing 

Among Five Approaches. 3rd ed. Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

Cross,  Mai’a  K.d.  2011.  Security  Integration  in  Europe:  How  Knowledge-Based 
Networks  are  Transforming  the  European  Union.  Ann  Arbor:  University  of 
Michigan Press.

Crossley, Nick. 2010. The Social World of the Network. Combining Qualitative 
and  Quantitative  Elements  in  Social  Network  Analysis.  Sociologica  1/2010. 
doi:10.2383/32049.

davis, Kathy, Monique leijenaar, and Jantine oldersma, eds. 1991. The Gender of 

Power6. london: Sage.

deeke,  Axel.  1995.  Experteninterviews  -  ein  methodologisches  und  forschun-
gspraktisches Problem * einleitende Bemerkungen und Fragen zum Workshop. 
In  Experteninterviews  in  der  Arbeitsmarktforschung.  Diskussionsbeiträge  zu 
methodischen Fragen und praktischen Erfahrungen, ed. Christian Brinkmann, 
Axel deeke, and Brigitte Völkel, vol. 191, 7–22. Nürnberg: IAB Beiträge zur 
Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung.

della Porta, donatella, and Mario diani. 2006. Social Movements: An Introduction. 

oxford: Blackwell.

274   REFERENCES

diez, Thomas. 2001. Speaking ‘Europe’: The Politics of Integration discourse. In 
The  Social  Construction  of  Europe,  ed.  Thomas  Christiansen,  Knud  Erik 
Jørgensen, and Antje Wiener, 85–100. london: Sage.

diMaggio,  Paul  J.,  and  Walter  W.  Powell.  1983.  The  Iron  Cage  Revisited: 
Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in organizational Fields. 
American Sociological Review 48: 147–160.

van doorne-Huiskes, Anneke. 1997. Equal opportunities in the European Union: 
Theory  and  Practice.  In  Gender  and  Economics:  A  European  Perspective,  ed. 
A. Geske dijkstra and Janneke Plantenga. london: Routledge.

dörr,  Nicole.  2007.  Is  ‘Another’  Public  Space  Actually  Possible?  deliberative 
democracy and the Case of ‘Women Without’ in the European Social Forum 
Process. Journal of International Women’s Studies 8 (3): 71–78.

Eising, Rainer, and Beate Kohler-Koch. 1999. Introduction: Network Governance 
in the European Union. In The Transformations of Governance in the European 
Union, ed. Beate Kohler-Koch and Rainer Eising, 3–13. london; New york: 
Routledge.

Ellina, Chrystalla A. 2003. Promoting Women’s Rights the Politics of Gender in the 

European Union. New york: Routledge.

Ellinas,  Antonis  A.,  and  Ezra  Suleiman.  2012.  The  European  Commission  and 
Bureaucratic  Autonomy.  Europe’s  Custodians.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

Ellis, Evelyn. 1998. European Community Sex Equality Law. New york: Clarendon 

Press.

Press.

Epiney, Astrid, and Marianne Freiermuth Abt. 2003. Das Recht der Gleichstellung 

von Mann und Frau in der EU. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Esping-Andersen, Gøsta, ed. 2002. Why We Need a New Welfare State. oxford: 

oxford University Press.

European  Commission.  2005.  Communication  from  the  Commission  on  the 

Social Agenda. CoM(2005) 33 final.

European  Commission.  2013.  PRoGRESS  Annual  Performance  Monitoring 
Report  2012.  Monitoring  of  the  Performance  of  the  European  Union 
Programme  for  Employment  and  Social  Solidarity.  PRoGRESS  (2007–13). 
luxembourg: Publications office of the European Union.

Evans,  Mary.  2003.  Gender  and  Social  Theory.  Buckingham:  open  University  

Ewig, Christina, and Myra Marx Ferree. 2013. Feminist organizing: What’s old, 
What’s New? History, Trends and Issues. In The Oxford Handbook of Gender 
and Politics, ed. Georgina Waylen, Karen Celis, Johanna Kantola, and laurel 
S. Weldon, 437–461. oxford; New york: oxford University Press.

Falkner,  Gerda.  2000.  Policy  Networks  in  a  Multi-level  System:  Convergence 

Towards Moderate diversity? West European Politics 23 (4): 94–120.

Favell,  Adrien,  and  Virginie  Guiraudon,  eds.  2011a.  Sociology  of  the  European 

Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

  REFERENCES 

 

  275

———, eds. 2011b. Introduction. In Sociology of the European Union, ed. Adrien 

Favell and Virginie Guiraudon. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Fraser, Nancy, and Axel Honneth. 2005. Umverteilung oder Anerkennung?: Eine 

politisch- philosophische Kontroverse. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Fredman, Sandra. 1992. European Community discrimination law: A Critique. 

The Industrial Law Journal 20 (2): 119–134.

———. 2006. Transformation or dilution: Fundamental Rights in the EU Social 

Space. European Law Journal 12 (1): 41–60.

Frey, Regina. 2003. Gender im Mainstreaming: Geschlechtertheorie und -praxis im 

internationalen Diskurs. Königstein/Taunus: Helmer.

Fuhrmann, Nora. 2005. Geschlechterpolitik im Prozess der europäischen Integration. 

Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Fuhse,  Jan,  and  Sophie  Mützel.  2011.  Tackling  Connections,  Structure,  and 
Meaning in Networks: Quantitative and Qualitative Methods in Sociological 
Network Research. Quality and Quantity 45 (5): 1067–1089.

Galligan, yvonne, and Sara Clavero. 2012. Gendering Enlargement of the EU. In 
Gendering the European Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits, ed. 
Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 104–123. Houndmills, Basingstoke; 
New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Geddes, Andrew, and Virginie Guiraudon. 2004. Britain, France, and EU Anti-
discrimination  Policy:  The  Emergence  of  an  EU  Policy  Paradigm.  West 
European Politics 27 (2): 334–353.

Giddens, Anthony. 1976. New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of 

Interpretative Sociologies. london: Hutchinson.

———.  1979.  Central  Problems  in  Social  Theory:  Action,  Structure,  and 

Contradiction in Social Analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. 

Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 1989. A Reply to My Critics. In Social Theory of Modern Societies: Anthony 
Giddens and His Critics, ed. david Held and John B. Thompson, 249–300. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1990. The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
———. 1991. Modernity and Self- Identity. Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. 

Cambridge: Polity Press.

———. 1992. The Transformation of Intimacy: Sexuality, Love, and Eroticism in 

Modern Societies. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

———.  1994.  Beyond  Left  and  Right:  the  Future  of  Radical  Politics.  Stanford: 

Stanford University Press.

———. 1995. Konsequenzen der Moderne. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
———. 2007. Europe in the Global Age. Cambridge: Polity Press.
———. 2009. Sociology. 6th ed. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, Anthony, Patrick diamond, and Roger liddle, eds. 2006. Global Europe, 

Social Europe. Cambridge: Polity Press.

276   REFERENCES

Givens, Terri E., and Rhonda Evans Case. 2014. Legislating Equality. The Politics 

of Antidiscrimination Policy in Europe. oxford: oxford University Press.

Gläser,  Jochen,  and  Grit  laudel.  2009.  Experteninterviews  und  qualitative 
Inhaltsanalyse als Instrumente rekonstruierender Untersuchungen. Wiesbaden: 
VS Verl. für Sozialwiss.

Glaser, Barney G., and Anselm Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory. 

Strategies for Qualitative Research. Chicago: Aldine.

Golub, Jonathan. 2008. The Study of decision-Making Speed in the European 
Union: Methods, data and Theory. European Union Politics European Union 
Politics 9 (1): 167–179.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of 

Embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology 91 (3): 481–510.

Greenwood,  Justin.  2007.  Interest  representation  in  the  European  Union. 

New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Haas,  Peter  M.  1992.  Introduction:  Epistemic  Communities  and  International 

Policy Coordination. International Organization 46 (1): 1–35.

Hafner-Burton, Emilie, and Mark Pollack. 2009. Mainstreaming Gender in the 
European Union. Getting the Incentives Right. Comparative European Politics 
7 (1): 114–138.

Hall,  Peter.  1987.  Interactionism  and  the  Study  of  Social  organisation.  The 

Sociological Quarterly 28: 1–22.

Hall, Peter A., and Rosemary C.R. Taylor. 1996. Political Science and the Three 

Institutionalisms. Political Studies 44 (5): 936–957.

Hantrais, linda, ed. 2000. Gendered Policies in Europe: Reconciling Employment 

and Family Life. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

———.  2003.  Social  Policy  in  the  European  Union.  Basingstoke,  Hampshire: 

Palgrave Macmillan.

Hartlapp, Miriam, Julia Metz, and Christian Rauh (2013). linking Agenda Setting 
to  Coordination  Structures:  Bureaucratic  Politics  Inside  the  European 
Commission. Journal of European Integration 35 (4): 425–441.

———. 2014. Which Policy for Europe? Power and Conflict Inside the European 

Commission. oxford: oxford University Press.

Hawkesworth, Mary. 2010. Policy discourse as Sanctioned Ignorance: Theorizing 

the Erasure of Feminist Knowledge. Critical Policy Studies 3 (3–4): 268–289.
Heinelt, Hubert, and Michèle Knodt, eds. 2011a. Policies within the EU Multi-
Level System. Instruments and Strategies of European Governance. Baden-Baden: 
Nomos.

———.  2011b.  Conclusion.  In  Policies  within  the  EU  Multi-Level  System. 
Instruments and Strategies of European Governance, 385–407. Baden-Baden: 
Nomos.

Held, david, and John B. Thompson, eds. 1989. Social Theory of Modern Societies: 

Anthony Giddens and His Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

  REFERENCES 

 

  277

Helfferich,  Cornelia.  2005.  Die  Qualität  qualitativer  Daten.  Manual  für  die 
für 

Interviews.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag 

Durchführung  qualitativer 
Sozialwissenschaften.

Helfferich,  Barbara,  and  Felix  Kolb.  2001.  Multilevel  Action  Coordination  in 
European Contentious Politics - the Case of the European Women’s lobby. In 
Contentious Europeans, ed. douglas R. Imig and Sidney G. Tarrow. lanham: 
Rowman & littlefield.

Héritier,  Adrienne.  2003.  New  Modes  of  Governance  in  Europe:  Increasing 
Political Capacity and Policy Effectiveness. In The State of the European Union, 
6:  Law,  Politics,  and  Society  in  Europe,  ed.  Tanja  A.  Börzel  and  Rachel 
A. Cichowski, 105–126. oxford: oxford University Press.

Hermanns, Harry. 2000. Interviewen als Tätigkeit. In Qualitative Forschung. Ein 
Handbuch,  ed.  Uwe  Flick,  Ernst  von  Kardoff,  and  Ines  Steinke,  360–368. 
Reinbeck bei Hamburg: Rowohlt.

Hix, Simon. 2005. The Political System of the European Union. london: Palgrave 

Macmillan.

———.  2006.  The  European  Union  as  a  Polity  (I).  In  Handbook  of  European 
Union Politics, ed. Knud Erik Jørgensen, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben Rosamond, 
141–158. london; Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

Hollstein,  Betina.  2011.  Qualitative  Approaches.  In  Sage  Handbook  of  Social 
Network Analysis, ed. John Scott and Peter J. Carrington, 404–417. london 
and New delhi: Sage.

Hollstein, Betina, and Jürgen Pfeffer (2010), Netzwerkkarten als Instrument zur 
Erhebung egozentrierter Netzwerke. In Unsichere Zeiten. Verhandlungen des 
34. Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Soziologie, 6.-10. Oktober, Jena, ed. 
H.-G.  Soeffner.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag  für  Sozialwissenschaften.  Accessed 
March 6, 2017. http://www.pfeffer.at/egonet/Hollstein%20Pfeffer.pdf.

Hollstein,  Betina,  and  Florian  Straus,  eds.  2006.  Qualitative  Netzwerkanalyse: 
Konzepte, Methoden, Anwendungen. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Hood, Christopher C. 1986. The Tools of Government. Chatham: Chatham House.
Hood, Christopher C., and Helen Z. Margetts. 2007. The Tools of Government in 

the Digital Age. london: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hooghe, liesbet. 2002. The European Commission and the Integration of Europe: 

Images of Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———.  2005.  Several  Roads  lead  to  International  Norms,  But  Few  Via 
International  Socialization:  A  Case  Study  of  the  European  Commission. 
International Organization 59 (4): 861–898.

Hooghe, liesbet, and Gary Marks. 2001. Multi-Level Governance. oxford: oxford 

University Press.

Hopf, Christel. 1978. die Pseudo- Exploration - Überlegungen zur Technik quali-
tativer  Interviews  in  der  Sozialforschung.  Zeitschrift  für  Soziologie  7  (2): 
97–115.

278   REFERENCES

Hoskyns, Catherine. 1996. Integrating Gender: Women, Law and Politics in the 

European Union. london: Verso.

———. 2000. A Study of Four Action Programmes on Equal opportunities. In 
Gender  Policies  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Maria  Grazia  Rossilli,  43–59. 
New york, Ny: lang.

———.  2008.  Governing  the  EU:  Gender  and  Macroeconomics.  In  Global 
Governance:  Feminist  Perspectives,  ed.  Shirin  Rai  and  Georgina  Waylen, 
107–128. Basingstoke; New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hubert,  Agnès,  and  Maria  Stratigaki.  2016.  Twenty  years  of  EU  Gender 

Mainstreaming: Rebirth out of the Ashes? Femina Politica 25 (2): 21–36.

Imig,  douglas  R.,  and  Sidney  G.  Tarrow,  eds.  2001.  Contentious  Europeans: 

Protest and Politics in an Emerging Polity. lanham: Rowman & littlefield.

Immergut, Ellen. 1998. The Theoretical Core of the New Institutionalism. Politics 

and Society 26 (1): 5–34.

Jacquot, Sophie. 2009. la fin d’une politique d’exception: l’émergence du gen-
der mainstreaming et la normalisation de la politique communautaire d’égalité 
entre  les  femmes  et  les  hommes.  Revue francaise de science politique  59  (2): 
247–277.

———. 2010. The Paradox of Gender Mainstreaming: Unanticipated Effects of 
New Modes of Governance in the Gender Equality domain. West European 
Politics 33 (1): 118–135.

———.  2015.  Transformations  in  EU  Gender  Equality.  From  Emergence  to 

Dismantling. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Jansen,  dorothea.  2006.  Einführung  in  die  Netzwerkanalyse:  Grundlagen, 

Methoden, Forschungsbeispiele. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Jennings, M. Kent. 1992. Ideological Thinking among Mass Publics and Political 

Elites. Public Opinion Quarterly 56 (4): 419–441.

Jenson, Jane. 2008. Writing Women out, Folding Gender In. Social Politics 15 

Jónasdóttir, Anna G., and Kathleen B. Jones, eds. 2009. The Political Interests of 
Gender Revisited: Redoing Theory and Research with a Feminist Face. Tokyo; 
New york; Paris: United Nations University Press.

Jones,  Charles  o.  1984.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Public  Policy.  Boston: 

(2): 131–153.

Wadsworth.

Jørgensen, Knud Erik, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben Rosamond. 2006. Handbook of 

European Union Politics. london; Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

Kahlert, Heike. 2005. “das Private ist Politisch!” die Entgrenzung des Politischen 
im Kontext von Anthony Giddens’ Strukturierungstheorie. In Forschungsfeld 
Politik. Geschlechtskategoriale Einführung in die Sozialwissenschaften, ed. Cilja 
Harders, Heike Kahlert, and delia Schindler, 147–173. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.
Kahn, Robert l., and Toni C. Antonucci. 1980. Convoys over the life Course: 
Attachment,  Roles,  and  Social  Support.  In  Life-Span  Development  and 

  REFERENCES 

 

  279

Behaviour,  ed.  P.B.  Baltes  and  o.G.  Brim,  383–405.  New  york:  Academic 
Press.

Kantola,  Johanna.  2006.  Feminists  Theorize  the  State.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 

Macmillan.

———. 2010. Gender and the European Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kantola, Johanna, and Kevät Nousiainen. 2012. European Union as an Initiator of 
New  European  Anti-discrimination  Regime. 
Institutionalising 
Intersectionality?  The  Changing  Nature  of  European  Equality  Regimes,  ed. 
Andrea  Krizsan,  Hege  Skjeie,  and  Judith  Squires.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 
Macmillan.

In 

Karamessini, Maria, and Jill Rubery, eds. 2013. Women and Austerity: The Economic 

Crisis and the Future for Gender Equality. london; New york: Routledge.

Kassim, Hussein, and Patrick le Galès. 2010. Exploring Governance in a Multi-
level Polity: A Policy Instruments Approach. West European Politics 33 (1): 
1–21.

Kauppi, Niilo. 2011. EU Politics. In Sociology of the European Union, ed. Adrien 

Favell and Virginie Guiraudon, 150–171. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy 

Networks in International Politics. Ithaca, Ny: Cornell University Press.

Kenny, Meryl. 2007. Gender, Institutions and Power: A Critical Review. Politics 

27 (2): 91–100.

Brown and Company.

Kingdon, John W. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston: little, 

Klatzer, Elisabeth, and Christina Schlager. 2014. Gender and Macroeconomics: 
Economic Governance in the European Union – Reconfiguration of Gendered 
Power Structures and Erosion of Gender Equality. In The SAGE Handbook auf 
Feminist  Theory,  ed.  Mary  Evans,  Clare  Hemmings,  Marsha  Henry,  Hazel 
Johnstone,  Sumi  Madhok,  Ania  Plomien,  and  Sadie  Wearing,  483–499. 
london: Sage.

Klein,  Uta.  2006.  Geschlechterverhältnisse  und  Gleichstellungspolitik  in  der 
Europäischen Union. Akteure - Themen - Ergebnisse. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für 
Sozialwissenschaften.

Klüver, Heike. 2012. lobbying As a Collective Enterprise: Winners and losers of 
Policy Formulation in the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy 
20 (1): 59–76.

———. 2014. Lobbying in the European Union: Interest Groups, Lobbying Coalitions 

and Policy Change. oxford: oxford University Press.

Knoke, david. 1990. Networks of Political Action: Toward Theory Construction. 

Social Forces 68 (4): 1041–1063.

Kohler-Koch, Beate, and Christine Quittkat, eds. 2011. Die Entzauberung par-
tizipativer Demokratie : zur Rolle der Zivilgesellschaft bei der Demokratisierung 
von EU-Governance. Frankfurt am Main: Campus-Verlag.

280   REFERENCES

Kolinsky,  Eva,  and  Hildegard  Maria  Nickel.  2003.  Introduction:  Reinventing 
Gender after the GdR. In Reinventing Gender: Women in Eastern Germany 
Since Unification, ed. Eva Kolinsky and Hildegard Maria Nickel, 1–27. london; 
Portland, oR: Cass.

König, Thomas. 2008. Analysing the Process of EU legislative decision- Making: 
To Make a long Story Short. European Union Politics European Union Politics 
9 (1): 145–165.

Koopmans, Ruud, and Paul Statham, eds. 2010. The Making of a European Public 
Sphere  Media  Discourse  and  Political  Contention.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

Kreisky,  Eva,  Sabine  lang,  and  Birgit  Sauer,  eds.  2001.  EU.  Geschlecht.  Staat. 

Wien: WUV.

Krizsan,  Andrea,  and  Emanuela  lombardo.  2014.  The  Quality  of  Gender  Equality 
Policies. A discursive Approach. European Journal of Women’s Studies 20 (1): 77–92.
Krizsan, Andrea, Judith Squires, and Hege Skjeie, eds. 2012. Institutionalizing 
Intersectionality.  The  Changing  Nature  of  European  Equality  Regimes. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Krook, Mona lena, and Fiona Mackay, eds. 2011. Gender, Politics and Institutions. 

Towards a Feminist Institutionalism. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

lamla, Jörn. 2003. Anthony Giddens. Frankfurt am Main: Campus.
lamnek,  Siegfried.  1989.  Qualitative Sozialforschung. Methoden und Techniken. 

München: Psychologie Verlags Union.

lang, Sabine. 1997. The NGoization of Feminism. In Transitions, Environments, 
Translations: Feminisms in International Politics, ed. Joan Wallach Scott, Cora 
Kaplan, and debra Keates, 101–120. New york: Routledge.

———. 2009. Assessing Advocacy: Transnational Women’s Networks and Gender 

Mainstreaming in the European Union. Social Politics 16 (3): 327–357.

lascoumes,  Pierre,  and  Patrick  le  Galès.  2007.  Understanding  Public  Policy 

Through its Instruments. Governance 20 (1): 1–21.

lemke, Christiane. 2004. Frauen in guter Verfassung? Gleichstellungspolitik in der 
europäischen Union. Chance Europa—Chance für Frauen, 3. Frauenpolitische 
Fachtagung  des  deutschen  Beamtinnen  Bund  (dbb).  Accessed  June  29,  2017.  
http://www.dbb.de/fileadmin/pdfs/frauen/2012/dokumentation_ 
fachtagung_3_europa.pdf 

lerner, daniel, and Harold lasswell. 1951. The Policy Sciences. Stanford: Stanford 

University Press.

liebert, Ulrike. 1999. Gender Politics in the European Union: The Return of the 

Public. European Societies 1 (2): 191–232.

———. 2003. Gendering Europeanisation: Patterns and dynamics. In Gendering 

Europeanisation, ed. Ulrike liebert, 255–283. Bruxelles: PIE lang.

liebert, Ulrike, and Hans-Jörg Trenz. 2009. Civil Society and the Reconstitution 
of democracy in Europe: Introducing a New Research Field. Policy and Society 
28 (1): 1–9.

  REFERENCES 

 

  281

littig, Beate. 2005. Interviews mit Experten und Expertinnen. Überlegungen aus 
geschlechtertheoretischer  Sicht.  In  Das  Experteninterview.  Theorie,  Methode, 
Anwendung,  ed.  Alexander  Bogner,  Beate  littig,  and  Wolfgang  Menz, 
191–206. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

locher,  Birgit.  2007.  Trafficking  in  Women  in  the  European  Union:  Norms, 
für 

Advocacy-Networks  and  Policy-Change.  Wiesbaden:  VS  Verlag 
Sozialwissenschaften.

locher,  Birgit,  and  Elisabeth  Prügl.  2001.  Feminism  and  Constructivism:  World’s 
Apart or Sharing the Middle Ground? International Studies Quarterly 45: 111–129.
lombardo,  Emanuela.  2005.  Integrating  or  Setting  the  Agenda?  Gender 
Mainstreaming in the European Constitution-Making Process. Social Politics 
12 (3): 412–432.

———. 2016. Social Constructivism in European Integration Theories: Gender 
and Intersectionality Perspectives. In Gendering European Integration Theory. 
Engaging New Dialogues. Opladen, ed. Gabriele Abels and Heather MacRae, 
123–146. Berlin & Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.

lombardo,  Emanuela,  and  Maxime  Forest,  eds.  2012.  The  Europeanization  of 
Gender  Equality  Policies.  A  Discursive-Sociological  Approach.  Houndsmill, 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

lombardo, Emanuela, and Petra Meier. 2008. Framing Gender Equality in the 

European Union discourse. Social Politics 15 (1): 101–129.

lombardo, Emanuela, Petra Meier, and Mieke Verloo, eds. 2009. The Discursive 
Politics  of  Gender  Equality:  Stretching,  Bending  and  Policymaking.  london: 
Routledge.

———.  2010.discursive  dynamics  in  Gender  Equality  Politics:  What  about 

‘Feminist Taboos’? European Journal of Women’s Studies 17 (2): 105–123.

———. 2013. Policy-Making. In The Oxford Handbook of Gender and Politics, ed. 
Georgina  Waylen,  Karen  Celis,  Johanna  Kantola,  and  laurel  S.  Weldon, 
679–702. oxford; New york: oxford University Press.

lombardo, Emanuela, and Mieke Verloo. 2009. Institutionalising Intersectionality 
in the European Union? Policy developments and Contestations. International 
Feminist Journal of Politics 11 (4): S.478–S.495.

loyal, Steven. 2003. The Sociology of Anthony Giddens. london: Pluto.
Mackay, Fiona, Meryl Kenny, and louise Chappell. 2010. New Institutionalism 
Through a Gender lens: Towards a Feminist Institutionalism? International 
Political Science Review 31 (5): 573–588.

MacKinnon, Catharine A. 1989. Toward a Feminist Theory of the State. Cambridge: 

Harvard University Press.

MacRae, Heather. 2010. The EU as a Gender Equal Polity: Myths and Realities. 

Journal of Common Market Studies 48 (1): 155–174.

Mahoney,  James.  2000.  Path  dependence  in  Historical  Sociology.  Theory  and 

Society 29 (4): 507–548.

282   REFERENCES

Mahoney,  Christine.  2007.  Networking  vs.  Allying:  The  decision  of  Interest 
Groups to Join Coalitions in the US and the EU. Journal of European Public 
Policy 14 (2): 366–383.

———. 2008. Brussels Versus the Beltway: Advocacy in the United States and the 

European Union. Washington: Georgetown University Press.

March,  James  G.,  and  Johan  P.  olsen.  1984.  The  New  Institutionalism: 
organizational Factors in Political life. The American Political Science Review 
78 (2): 734–749.

March,  James  G.,  and  Johann  P.  olsen.  1989.  Rediscovering  Institutions.  The 

Organizational Basis of Politics. New york: The Free Press.

Marks,  Gary,  and  doug  McAdam.  1999.  on  the  Relationship  of  Political 
opportunities to the Form of Collective Action: The Case of the European 
Union. In Social Movements in a Globalizing World, ed. donnatella della Porta, 
Hanspeter Kriesi, and dieter Rucht, 97–111. Chippenham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Marsh, david, ed. 1998. Comparing Policy Networks. Buckingham, Philadelphia: 

open University Press.

Marshall, Barbara l. 1994. Engendering Modernity. Feminism, Social Theory and 

Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Marshall, david. 2010. Who to lobby and When: Institutional determinants of 
Interest  Group  Strategies  in  European  Parliament  Committees.  European 
Union Politics 11 (4): 553–575.

Marshall, Barbara l., and Anne Witz, eds. 2004. Engendering the Social Feminist 

Encounters with Sociological Theory. Maidenhead: open University Press.

Masselot,  Annick.  2007.  The  State  of  Gender  Equality  law  in  the  European 

Union. European Law Journal 13 (2): 152–168.

Mazey,  Sonia.  1995.  The  development  of  EU  Equality  Policie:  Bureaucratic 

Expansion on Behalf of Women? Public Administration 73 (4): 591–609.

———.  1998.  The  European  Union  and  Women’s  Rights:  From  the 
Europeanization  of  National  Agendas  to  the  Nationalization  of  a  European 
Agenda. Journal of European Public Policy 5 (1): 131–152.

———. 2001. Gender Mainstreaming in the EU: Principles and Practice. london: 

Kogan Page.

———. 2012. Policy Entrepreneurship, Group Mobilisation and the Creation of 
a  New  Policy  domain:  Women’s  Rights  and  the  European  Union.  In 
Constructing a Policy- Making State? Policy Dynamics in the European Union, 
ed. Jeremy Richardson, 125–144. oxford: oxford University Press.

Mazey, Sonia, and Jeremy Richardson. 2006. The Commission and the lobby. In 
The European Commission, ed. david Spence, 279–290. london: John Harper 
Publishing.

Mazur, Amy G. 2017. Toward the Systematic Study of Feminist Policy in Practice: 

An Essential First Step. Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 38 (1): 64–83.

Mazur, Amy G., and dorothy E. McBride, eds. 2010. The Politics of State Feminism. 

Innovation in Comparative Research. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

  REFERENCES 

 

  283

McAdam, doug, John d. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald, eds. 1996. Comparative 
Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, 
and Cultural Framings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

McCulloch,  Gary.  2004.  Documentary  Research  in  Education,  History  and  the 

Social Sciences. New york: Routledge.

Mérand,  Frédéric.  2011.  EU  Policies.  In  Sociology  of  the  European  Union,  ed. 
Adrien  Favell  and  Virginie  Guiraudon,  172–192.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 
Macmillan.

Merton, Robert K. 1957. The Self- Fulfilling Prophecy. In Social Theory and Social 

Structure, ed. K. Merton, 2nd ed., 475–490. New york: Free Press.

———. 1972. Insiders and outsiders: A Chapter in the Sociology of Knowledge. 

American Journal of Sociology 78 (1): 9–47.

Meuser,  Michael,  and  Ulrike  Nagel.  2004.  ExpertInneninterview:  Zur 
Rekonstruktion  spezialisierten  Sonderwissens.  In  Handbuch  Frauen-  und 
Geschlechterforschung: Theorie, Methoden, Empirie, ed. Ruth Becker and Beate 
Kortendieck, 326–329. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

———.  2005.  ExpertInneninterviews  -  vielfach  erprobt,  wenig  bedacht.  Ein 
Beitrag  zur  qualitativen  Methodendiskussion.  In  Das  Experteninterview. 
Theorie,  Methode,  Anwendung,  ed.  Alexander  Bogner,  Beate  littig,  and 
Wolfgang Menz, 71–93. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Montoya,  Celeste.  2008.  The  European  Union,  Capacity  Building,  and 
Transnational  Networks:  Combating  Violence  Against  Women  Through  the 
daphne Program. International Organization 62 (1): 359–372.

———. 2009. International Initiative and domestic Reforms: European Union 
Efforts to Combat Violence Against Women. Politics & Gender 5 (3): 325–348.
Mósesdóttir,  Magnussen.  2003.  Moving  Europe  Towards  the  Dual  Breadwinner 
Model. Five Years of Experience of the Luxembourg Employment Strategy. Brussels: 
ETUI.

Murgatroyd,  linda.  1989.  only  half  the  story:  Some  blinkering  Effects  of 
‘Malestream’ Sociology. In Social Theory of Modern Societies, Anthony Giddens 
and his Critics, ed. david Held and John B. Thompson, 147–167. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Nugent, Neill. 2000. At the Heart of the Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
o’Connor, Julia. 2008. The oMC and the EES: Broadening the Possibilities for 
Gender Equality? In Gender and the Open Method of Coordination, ed. Samantha 
Velluti and Fiona Beveridge, 77–101. Aldershot: Ashgate.

ortmann, Günther. 2008. Organisation und Welterschließung. Dekonstruktionen. 

Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.

ostner,  Ilona.  1995.  Arm  ohne  Ehemann?  Sozialpolitische  Regulierung  von 
lebenschancen  für  Frauen  im  internationalen  Vergleich.  Aus  Politik  und 
Zeitgeschichte, Beilage zur Wochenzeitung Das Parlament B 36–37 (95): 3–12.

ostner, Ilona, and Jane lewis. 1998. Geschlechterpolitik zwischen europäischer 
und  nationalstaatlicher  Regelung.  In  Standort  Europa:  sozialpolitik  zwischen 

284   REFERENCES

nationalstaat  und  Europäischer  integration,  ed.  Stephan  leibfried  and  Paul 
Pierson, 196–239. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Perreira,  Maria  do  Mar.  2012.  ‘Feminist  Theory  is  Proper  Knowledge,  But…’: 
The  Status  of  Feminist  Scholarship  in  the  Academy.  Feminist  Theory  13: 
283–303.

Peters,  B.  Guy.  1999.  Institutional  Theory  in  Political  Science.  The  New 

Institutionalism. london: Pinter.

Peters,  B.  Guy,  Maurice  Falk,  and  Frans  K.M.  van  Nispen.  1998.  Public  Policy 
Instruments.  Evaluating  the  Tools  of  Public  Administration.  Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar.

Piattoni,  Simona.  2010.  The  Theory  of  Multi-Level  Governance:  Conceptual, 

Empirical, and Normative Challenges. oxford: oxford University Press.

Pierson,  Paul,  and  Theda  Skocpol.  2002.  Historical  Institutionalism 

in 
Contemporary Political Science. In Political Science: State of the Discipline, ed. 
Ira Katznelson and Helen V. Milner, 693–721. New york: W.W. Norton.

Pollack, Mark A., and Hafner-Burton, Emilie. 2000. Mainstreaming Gender in the 
European Union. Harvard Jean Monnet Working Paper. 2/, 2000. Cambridge.
Powell, Walter W., and Paul J. diMaggio, eds. 1991. The New Institutionalism in 

Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Prudovska,  Tetyana,  and  Myra  Max  Ferree.  2004.  Global  Activism  in  “Virtual 
Space”:  The  European  Women’s  lobby  in  the  Network  of  Transnational 
Women’s NGos on the Web. Social Politics 11 (1): 117–143.

Prügl, Elisabeth. 2006. Gender and European Union Politics. In Ben Handbook of 
European Union Politics, ed. Knud Erik Jørgensen, Mark A. Pollack, and Ben 
Rosamond, 433–448. london; Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

Putnam,  Robert.  1988.  diplomacy  and  domestic  Politics:  The  logic  of  Two-
level  Games.  International  Organization  42:  427–460.  doi:10.1017/
S0020818300027697.

Rai, Shirin. 2003. Mainstreaming Gender, Democratizing the State: Institutional 
Mechanisms for the Advancement of Women. Manchester: Manchester University 
Press.

Raiser, Christoph. 2014. Kompromisse im Europäischen Parlament: eine kultursozi-
ologische Analyse von Entscheidungsprozessen in einer supranationalen Institution. 
Potsdam: Universitätsverlag Potsdam.

Rees, Teresa l. 1998. Mainstreaming Equality in the European Union: Education 

Training and Labour Market Policies. london: Routledge.

Richardson, Jeremy. 2005. European Union: Power and Policy-Making. New york: 

Routledge.

———,  ed.  2012.  Constructing  a  Policy-Making  State?  Policy  Dynamics  in  the 

European Union. oxford: oxford University Press.

Rolandsen Agustín, lise. 2013. Gender Equality, Intersectionality and Diversity in 

Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

  REFERENCES 

 

  285

Rönnblom, Malin. 2005. letting Women In? Gender Mainstreaming in Regional 

Policies. NORA 13 (3): 164–174.

Rossilli, Mariagrazia. 1997. The European Community’s Policy on the Equality of 
Women: From the Treaty of Rome to the Present. European Journal of Women’s 
Studies European Journal of Women’s Studies 4 (1): 63–82.

———, ed. 2000. Gender Policies in the European Union. New york: lang.
Roth,  Silke,  ed.  2008.  Gender  Politics  in  the  Expanding  European  Union: 

Mobilization, Inclusion, Exclusion. oxford; New york: Berghahn.

Rozbicka, Patrycja. 2013. Advocacy Coalitions: Influencing the Policy Process in 

the EU. Journal of European Public Policy 20 (6): 838–853.

Rubery, Jill. 2002. Gender Mainstreaming and Gender Equality in the EU: The 
Impact of the EU Employment Strategy. Industrial Relations Journal 33 (5): 
500–522.

Rust, Ursula. 2005. Gleichstellung von Mann und Frau. In Die Zukunft der sozi-
alen  Dienste  vor  der  Europäischen  Herausforderung,  ed.  Christine  linzbach, 
Uwe lübking, Stephanie Scholz, and Bernd Schulte, 133–151. Baden-Baden: 
Nomos.

Ruzza, Carlo. 2004. Europe and Civil Society: Movement Coalitions and European 

Governance. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Sabatier,  Paul  A.  1998.  The  Advocacy  Coalition  Framework:  Revisions  and 

Relevance for Europe. Journal of European Public Policy 5 (1): 98–130.

———., ed. 1999. Theories of the Policy Process. Boulder, Co: Westview Press.
Sabatier,  Paul  A.,  and  Hank  C.  Jenkins- Smith,  eds.  1993.  Policy  Change  
and  Learning:  An  Advocacy  Coalition  Approach.  Boulder,  Co:  Westview  
Press.

Sainsbury,  diane.  1996.  Gender,  Equality,  and  Welfare  States.  Cambridge: 

Salamon, lester M. 2002. The Tools of Government: A Guide to the New Governance. 

Cambridge University Press.

New york: oxford University Press.

Sarikakis,  Katharine.  2003.  A  Feminist  in  Brussels  (and  Glasgow,  Berlin, 
düsseldorf...): Self-Configuration in Research into European Union Politics. 
European Journal of Women’s Studies 10 (4): 423–441.

Saurugger,  Sabine.  2014.  Theoretical  Approaches  to  European  Integration. 

Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Scharpf, Fritz W. 1997. Games Real Actors Play: Actor-Centered Institutionalism 

in Policy Research. Boulder, Co: Westview Press.

Schmidt,  Verena. 

Geschlechtergerechtigkeit 
Frauenforschung und Geschlechterstudien 1: 45–62.

2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming 

als  leitbild 
in  organisationsstrukturen.  Zeitschrift 

für 
für 

———.  2005.  Gender  Mainstreaming  -  an  Innovation  in  Europe?  The 
Institutionalisation  of  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Commission. 
opladen: Barbara Budrich.

286   REFERENCES

Schmidt, Vivien A. 2008. discursive Institutionalism: The Explanatory Power of 

Ideas and discourse. Annual Review of Political Science 11: 303–326.

———.  2013.  democracy  and  legitimacy  in  the  European  Union  Revisited: 

Input, output and ‘Throughput’. Political Studies 61 (1): 2–22.

Schmitter,  Phillipe  C.  1970.  Central  American  Integration:  Spill-over,  Spill-

Around or Encapsulation? Journal of Common Market Studies 9 (1): 1–48.

———. 1996. Examining the Present Euro-Polity With the Help of Past Theories. 
In  Governance  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Fritz  W.  Scharpf,  Gary  Marks, 
Phillipe C. Schmitter, and Wolfgang Streeck, 1–14. london: Sage.

Schunter-Kleemann,  Susanne.  1992.  Geschlechterdifferenz  in  der  politischen 

debatte zur Europäischen Union. PROKLA 23 (23): 451–472.

———.  1994.  das  demokratiedefizit  der  Europäischen  Union  und  die 
Frauenpolitik.  In  Das  unsichtbare  Geschlecht  der  Europa:  der  europäische 
Einigungsprozess aus feministischer Sicht, ed. Elke Biester, 20–38. Frankfurt am 
Main; New york: Campus.

———. 1999. Europäische Geschlechterpolitik - tauglich für das 3. Jahrtausend. 
In Es rettet uns kein höh'res Wesen, ed. Brigitte Stols- Willig and Mechthild Veil, 
138–167. Hamburg: VSA.

Schütze, Fritz. 1977. Die Technik des narrativen Interviews in Interaktionsfeldstudien: 
dargestellt an einem Projekt zur Erforschung von kommunalen Machtstrukturen. 
Arbeitsberichte  und  Forschungsmaterialien  Nr.  1.  Fakultät  für  Soziologie  an 
der Universität Bielefeld.

Scott,  John,  and  Peter  Carrington,  eds.  2011.  The  SAGE  Handbook  of  Social 

Network Analysis. london: Sage.

Shaw, Jo. 2005. Mainstreaming Equality and diversity in European Union law 

and Policy. Current Legal Problems 58: 255–312.

Shepsle, Kenneth A. 2006. Rational Choice Institutionalism. In Oxford Handbook 
of  Political  Institutions,  ed.  Sarah  A.  Binder,  R.A.W.  Rhodes,  and  Bert 
A. Rockman, 23–39. oxford: oxford University Press.

Smith, Steve. 2001. Social Constructivism and European Studies. In The Social 
Construction of Europe, ed. Thomas Christiansen, Knud Erik Jørgensen, and 
Antje Wiener, 189–198. london: Sage.

Smith, Mark, and Paola Villa. 2010. The Ever-declining Role of Gender Equality 
in  the  European  Employment  Strategy.  Industrial Relations Journal  41  (6): 
526–543.

Spence,  david,  and  Geoffrey  Edwards,  eds.  2006.  The  European  Commission. 

london: John Harper Publishing.

Squires, Judith. 1999. Re-thinking the Boundaries of Political Representation. In 
New  Agendas  for  Women,  ed.  Sylvia  Walby,  169–189.  Basingstoke:  Palgrave 
Macmillan.

———.  2005.  Is  Mainstreaming  Transformative?  Theorizing  Mainstreaming  in 

the Context of diversity and deliberation. Social Politics 12 (3): 366–388.

  REFERENCES 

 

  287

Statham, Paul, and Hans-Jörg Trenz. 2013. The Politicization of Europe: Contesting 

the Constitution in the Mass Media. New york: Routledge.

Staudt,  Kathleen,  and  Jane  Jacquette.  1988.  Women’s  Programs,  Bureaucratic 
Resistance and Feminist organisation. In Women, Power and Policy: Towards the 
Year 2000, ed. Ellen Boneparth and Emily Stoper. New york: Pergamon Press.
Steinmo, Steven. 2008. Historical Institutionalism. In Approaches and Methodologies 
in  the  Social  Sciences:  A  pluralist  Perspective,  ed.  donatella  della  Porta  and 
Michael Keating, 118–138. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stephenson, Paul. 2013. Twenty years of Multi-level Governance: ‘Where does 
It Come From? What Is It? Where Is It Going?’. Journal of European Public 
Policy 20 (6): 817–837.

Stiegler,  Barbara.  2000.  Wie  Gender  in  den  Mainstream  kommt:  Konzepte, 
Argumente  und  Praxisbeispiele  zur  EU-Strategie  des  Gender- Mainstreaming. 
Bonn: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.

Straßheim, Holger. 2011. Netzwerkpolitik: Governance und Wissen im administra-

tiven Austausch. Baden-Baden: Nomos.

Stratigaki, Maria. 2004. The Cooptation of Gender Concepts in EU policies: The 

Case of Reconciliation of Work and Family. Social Politics 11 (1): 30–56.

———. 2005. Gender Mainstreaming vs Positive Action: An on-going Conflict in EU 

Gender Equality Policy. European Journal of Women’s Studies 12 (2): 165–186.

Strauss, Anselm. 1973. Social World Perspective. Studies in Symbolic Interaction 1: 

Strauss, Anselm, and Juliet Corbin. 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research. Techniques 

and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

Tarrow, Sidney. 2005. The New Transnational Activism. Cambridge: Cambridge 

119–128.

University Press.

Thelen,  Kathleen.  1999.  Historical  Institutionalism  in  Comparative  Politics. 

Annual Review of Political Science 2: 369–404.

———.  2003.  How  Institutions  Evolve:  Insights  from  Comparative  Historical 
Analysis.  In  Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences,  ed.  James 
Mahoney  and  dieter  Rueschemeyer,  208–240.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.

———. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy of Skills in Germany, 
Britain, the United States, and Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thelen,  Kathleen,  and  Sven  Steinmo.  1992.  Institutionalism  in  Comparative 
Politics.  In  Structuring  Politics:  Historical  Institutionalism  in  Comparative 
Analysis,  ed.  Kathleen  Thelen,  Sven  Steinmo,  and  Frank  longstreth,  1–32. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Thies, Cameron. 2002. A Pragmatic Guide to Qualitative Historical Analysis in 
the Study of International Relations. International Studies Perspectives 3 (4): 
351–372.

Tholoniat, luc. 2010. The Career of the open Method of Coordination: lessons 

from a “Soft” EU Instrument. West European Politics 33 (1): 93–117.

288   REFERENCES

Thomas, Christiansen, and Simona Piattoni, eds. 2004. Informal Governance and 

the European Union. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Thompson, John B. 1990. Studies in the Theory of Ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge 

Tilly,  Charles.  2002.  Stories,  Identities,  and  Political  Change.  oxford:  Rowman 

Polity Press.

and littlefield.

———.  2006.  Why  and  How  History  Matters.  In  The  Oxford  Handbook  of 
Contextual Political Analysis, ed. Robert E. Goodin and Charles Tilly, 417–437. 
oxford: oxford University Press.

True,  Jaqui,  and  Michael  Mintrom.  2001.  Transnational  Networks  and  Policy 
diffusion: The Case of Gender Mainstreaming. International Studies Quarterly 
45 (1): 27–57.

Tsebelis, George. 2002. Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press.

Tsoukalis, loukas. 1997. The New European Economy Revisited. oxford: oxford 

Tucker, Kenneth H. 1998. Anthony Giddens and Modern Social Theory. london: 

University Press.

Sage.

Van der Vleuten, Anna. 2007. The Price of Gender Equality: Member States and 

Governance in the European Union. Aldershot: Ashgate.

———. 2012. Gendering the Institutions and Actors of the EU. In Gendering the 
European Union: New Approaches to Old Democratic Deficits, ed. Gabriele Abels 
and  Joyce  Marie  Mushaben,  41–62.  Houndmills,  Basingstoke;  New  york: 
Palgrave Macmillan.

Van der Vleuten, Anna, Anouka van Eerdewijk, and Conny Roggeband, eds. 2014. 
Gender  Equality  Norms  in  Regional  Governance:  Transnational  Dynamics  in 
Europe, South America and Southern Africa. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Verloo,  Mieke.  2005.  displacement  and  Empowerment:  Reflections  on  the 
Concept  and  Practice  of  the  Council  of  Europe  Approach  to  Gender 
Mainstreaming and Gender Equality. Social Politics 12 (3): 344–365.

———, ed. 2007. Multiple Meanings of Gender Equality: A Critical Frame Analysis 
of Gender Policies in Europe. Budapest; New york: Central European University 
Press.

Vromen,  Ariadne.  2010.  debating  Methods:  Rediscovering  Qualitative 
Approaches. In Theory and Methods in Political Science, ed. david Marsh and 
Gerry Stoker, 249–266. New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Walby, Sylvia. 1990. Theorizing Patriarchy. oxford: Blackwell.
———. 2004. The European Union and Gender Equality: Emergent Varieties of 
Gender  Regimes.  Social  Politics:  International  Studies  in  Gender  State  and 
Society 11 (1): 4–29.

———.  2005.  Gender  Mainstreaming:  Productive  Tensions  in  Theory  and 
Practice. Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society 12 
(3): 321–343.

  REFERENCES 

 

  289

———.  2009.  Globalization  and  Inequalities:  Complexity  and  Contested 

Modernities. los Angeles: Sage.

Wallace, Helen, William Wallace, and Mark A. Pollack. 2005. Policy- Making in the 

European Union. oxford: oxford University Press.

Wassermann, Stanley, and Katherine Faust. 1994. Social Network Analysis: Methods 
and  Applications  (Structural  Analysis  in  the  Social  Sciences).  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Watson, Peggy. 2000. Politics, Policy and Identity: EU Eastern Enlargement and 

East-West differences. Journal of European Public Policy 7 (3): 369–384.

Waylen,  Georgina.  2007.  Engendering  Transitions:  Women's  Mobilization, 

Institutions and Gender Outcomes. oxford: oxford University Press.

Weingast, Barry R. 1996. Political Institutions: Rational Choice Perspectives. In A 
New  Handbook  of  Political  Science,  ed.  Robert  E.  Goodin  and  Hans-dieter 
Klingemann, 167–190. oxford: oxford University Press.

Weiss,  doris.  1998.  Atypische  Beschäftigung  in  Europa:  Zur  diskrepanz  von 
Marktrealität und Gesetzgebung der Europäischen Union. In Flexibles Europa: 
die  Auswirkungen  von  Deregulierung  und  Flexibilisierung  europäischer 
Arbeitsmärkte auf die Arbeits- und Lebensbedingungen von Frauen, ed. doris 
Weiss, 25–60. Frankfurt am Main; New york: P. lang.

Wobbe,  Theresa,  and  Ingrid  Biermann.  2009.  Von  Rom  nach  Amsterdam.  Die 
Metamorphosen  des  Geschlechts  in  der  Europäischen  Union.  Wiesbaden:  VS 
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Wöhl,  Stefanie.  2008.  Global  Governance  as  Neo-liberal  Governmentality: 
Gender  Mainstreaming  in  the  European  Employment  Strategy.  In  Global 
Governance: Feminist Perspectives, ed. Shirin Rai and Georgina Waylen, 64–83. 
Basingstoke; New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Wolff, Stephan. 2000. dokumenten- und Aktenanalyse. In Qualitative Forschung. 
Ein Handbuch, ed. Uwe Flick, Ernst von Kardoff, and Ines Steinke, 502–513. 
Reinbeck bei Hamburg: Rowohlt.

Wolffensberger,  Joan.  1991.  Engendered  Structure:  Giddens  and 

the 
Conceptualization  of  Gender.  In  The  Gender  of  Power,  ed.  Kathy  davis, 
Monique leijenaar, and Jantine oldersma, 87–108. london: Sage.

Woodward, Alison E. 1999. Women Acting Rationally: Speaking the language of 
Power to Gender Test the State. In Rationalisation, Organisation, Gender, ed. 
Monika  Goldmann,  133–144.  Sozialforschungsstelle  dortmund  (sfs): 
dortmund.

———.  2001.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in  European  Policy:  Innovation  or 

deception? Discussion Paper. Berlin: WZB Berlin.

Woodward, Alison. 2003. European Gender Mainstreaming: Promises and Pitfalls 

of Transformative Policy. Review of Policy Research 20 (1): 65–88.

Woodward,  Alison  E.  2004.  Building  Velvet  Triangles:  Gender  and  Informal 
Governance.  In  Informal  Governance  in  the  European  Union,  ed.  Thomas 
Christiansen, 76–93. Cheltenham: Elgar.

290   KEy doCUMENTS doCUMENTARy RESEARCH

———.  2008.  Too  late  for  Gender  Mainstreaming?  Taking  Stock  in  Brussels. 

Journal of European Social Policy 18 (3): 289–302.

———.  2012.  From  Equal  Treatment  to  Gender  Mainstreaming  and  diversity 
Management.  In  Gendering  the  European  Union:  New  Approaches  to  Old 
Democratic Deficits, ed. Gabriele Abels and Joyce Marie Mushaben, 85–103. 
Houndmills, Basingstoke; New york: Palgrave Macmillan.

Zippel, Kathrin. 2004. Transnational Advocacy Networks and Policy Cycles in the 
European Union: The Case of Sexual Harassment. Social Politics 11 (1): 57–85.

Key docuMents docuMentAry reseArch

Advisory Committee on Equal opportunities for Women and Men. 2003. opinion 

on the Gender dimension in the Structural Funds.

———. 2006a. The Role of Civil Society in Implementing European legislation 

on Equal Treatment for Women and Men in the Area of Equality at Work.

———.  2006b.  opinion  on  the  Gender  dimension  in  the  Next  Programming 

Period of the Structural Funds 2007–2013.

———. 2006c. Men in Gender Equality.
———. 2007a. opinion on the Revision of the Integrated Guidelines for Growth 

and Jobs.

———. 2007b. opinion on Pay Gap.
———. 2007c. opinion on EU Network of Women in Economic and Political 

decision-Making Positions.

———. 2008. opinion on the Future of the EU Budget.
Amended Proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council 
Establishing for the Period 2007–2013 the Specific Programme “Fight against 
violence (daphne)” as part of the General programme “Fundamental Rights 
and Justice”. CoM. 2006. 230 final. Cod 2005/0037 A */.

Commission Communication - The demographic future of Europe – From chal-

lenge to opportunity. CoM. 2006. 571 final.

Commission of the European Communities: Memorandum to the Commission of 
2nd May 2007 on the targets for the recruitment and appointment of women 
to  management  and  other  Ad  posts  in  the  Commission  for  the  year  2007 
(Memorandum from Vice-President S. Kallas). Brussels: SEC. 2007. 507.

Commission Staff Working document - Annex to the Communication from the 
Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European Economic 
and  Social  committee  and  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  -  A  Roadmap  for 
equality  between  women  and  men  2006-2010  -  Impact  assessment. 
CoM(2006) 92 final. /* SEC/2006/0275 */.

Communication from the Commission - Cohesion Policy in Support of Growth 
and  Jobs  -  Community  Strategic  Guidelines,  2007-2013.  CoM(2005)  299 
final. {SEC(2005a) 904}.

  KEy doCUMENTS doCUMENTARy RESEARCH 

 

  291

Communication  from  the  Commission  -  Policy  Plan  on  legal  Migration. 

CoM(2005) 669 final. {SEC(2005b)1680}.

Communication  from  the  Commission  “Incorporating  equal  opportunities  for 
women  and  men  into  all  Community  policies  and  activities”.  CoM(96)  67 
final. Not published in the official Journal, 21/02/1996.

Communication from the Commission on the Social Agenda. CoM(2005c) 33 

final.

Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council  and  the  European 
Parliament - Programme of Action for the mainstreaming of gender equality in 
Community  development  Co-operation.  CoM(2001a)  295  final.  Brussels: 
21/06/2001.

Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament 
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: The Commission’s 
contribution to the period of reflection and beyond: Plan-d for democracy, 
dialogue and debate. CoM(2005d) 494 final.

Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament 
and the Economic and Social Committee - Supporting national strategies for 
safe and sustainable pensions through an integrated approach. CoM(2001b) 
362 final. Brussels: 03/07/2001.

Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, 
the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions - A Common Agenda for Integration - Framework for the Integration 
of Third-Country Nationals in the European Union. CoM(2005a) 389 final.

Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, 
the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions - draft Joint Report by the Commission and the Council on Adequate 
and Sustainable Pensions. CoM(2002) 737 Final.

Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, 
the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions - Non- discrimination and Equal opportunities for All - A Framework 
Strategy. CoM(2005b) 224 final. {SEC(2005) 689}.

Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, 
the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the 
Regions  -  The  Commission’s  Contribution  to  the  Period  of  Reflection  and 
Beyond: Plan d for democracy, dialogue and debate. CoM(2005c) 494 final.
Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
Council - Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2006 – 2007. Including 
Annexed  Special  Report  on  the  EU’s  Capacity  to  Integrate  New  Members. 
CoM(2006) 649 final.

Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
Council - Fighting Trafficking in Human Beings: An Integrated Approach and 
Proposals for an Action Plan. CoM(2005) 514 final.

292   KEy doCUMENTS doCUMENTARy RESEARCH

Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
Council  -  Gender  Equality  and  Women  Empowerment  in  development 
Cooperation. CoM(2007) 100 final. [SEC(2007) 332].

Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council 
and  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  -  developing  a 
Comprehensive  and  Coherent  EU  Strategy  to  Measure  Crime  and  Criminal 
Justice: An EU Action Plan 2006-2010. CoM(2006) 437 final.

Corrigendum to Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006 of 11 July 2006 laying 
down General Provisions on the European Regional development Fund, the 
European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund and Repealing Regulation (EC) 
No 1260/1999. official Journal l 210, 31/7/2006.

Council decision of 12 July 2005 on Guidelines for the Employment Policies of 
the  Member  States.  2005/600/EC.  official  Journal  l  205,  06/08/2005, 
21–27.

Council decision of 20 February 2006 on Community Strategic Guidelines for 
Rural development (Programming Period 2007 to 2013) (2006/144/EC). 
official Journal l 55, 25/02/2006, 20.

Council directive 2004/81/EC of 29 April 2004 on the Residence Permit Issued 
to  Third-Country  Nationals  Who  are  Victims  of  Trafficking  in  Human  
Beings  or  Who  Have  Been  the  Subject  of  an  Action  to  Facilitate  Illegal 
Immigration, Who Cooperate with the Competent Authorities. official Journal 
l 261, 06/08/2004, 19–23.

Council  of  The  European  Union.  2006.  Check  list  to  Ensure  Gender 
Mainstreaming  and  Implementation  of  UNSCR  1325  in  the  Planning  and 
Conduct of ESdP operations. 27 July 2006.

Council Recommendation 2005/601/EC of 12 July 2005 on the Broad Economic 
Policy  Guidelines  of  the  Member  States  and  the  Community  (2005–2008) 
[official Journal l 205, 6.8.2005].

Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1198/2006  of  27  July  2006  on  the  European 

Fisheries Fund. official Journal l 223, 15/08/2006, 1–44.

Council Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005 of 20 September 2005 on Support for 
Rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural development 
(EAFRd). official Journal l 277, 21/10/2005, 1–40.

decision No 1639/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
24 october 2006 Establishing a Competitiveness and Innovation Framework 
Programme (2007 to 2013). official Journal l 310, 09/11/2006a, 15–40.

decision No 1720/2006b/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
15 November 2006 Establishing an Action Programme in the Field of lifelong 
learning. official Journal l 327, 24/11/2006, 45–68.

decision No 1786/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
23 September 2002 Adopting a Programme of Community Action in the Field 
of Public Health (2003–2008) - Commission Statements. official Journal l 
271, 09/10/2002, 1–12.

  KEy doCUMENTS doCUMENTARy RESEARCH 

 

  293

decision No 1904/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
12 december 2006 Establishing for the Period 2007 to 2013 the Programme 
Europe for Citizens to Promote Active European Citizenship. official Journal 
l 378, 27/12/2006c, 32–40.

decision No 1926/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
18 december 2006 Establishing a Programme of Community Action in the 
Field of Consumer Policy (2007–2013) (Text with EEA Relevance). official 
Journal l 404, 30/12/2006d, 39–45.

decision No 1982/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
18  december  2006  Concerning  the  Seventh  Framework  Programme  of  the 
European  Community 
for  Research,  Technological  development  and 
demonstration  Activities  (2007–2013).  Statements  by  the  Commission. 
official Journal l 412, 30/12/2006e, 1–43.

decision No 771/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 
May  2006  Establishing  the  European  year  of  Equal  opportunities  for  All 
(2007)—Towards a Just Society (Text with EEA Relevance). official Journal l 
146, 31/05/2006, 1–7.

directive 2006/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 
2006  on  the  Implementation  of  the  Principle  of  Equal  opportunities  and 
Equal  Treatment  of  Men  and  Women  in  Matters  of  Employment  and 
occupation (recast). official Journal l 204, 26/07/2006, 23–36.

Education & Training. 2010. The Success of the lisbon Strategy Hinges on Urgent 
Reforms—Joint  Interim  Report  of  the  Council  and  the  Commission  on  the 
Implementation  of  the  detailed  Work  Programme  on  the  Follow-up  of  the 
objectives of Education and Training Systems in Europe. CoM(2003) 685 final.
European  Commission.  2006a.  Impact  Assessment  Guidelines.  Brussels, 

SEC(2005) 791.

———.  2006b.  Community  Action  Programme  for  Employment  and  Social 
Solidarity – PRoGRESS. Committee for the Implementation of the Community 
Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity - PRoGRESS - 2007-2013. 
Minutes  of  the  First  Meeting  of  the  Programme  Committee  12  december 
2006. Brussels, 21 december, 2006, PRoGRESS/007/2006.

———.  2006c.  Europe  for  Citizens  Programme  2007-2013—Conditional 

Publication of the Programme Guide. (2006/C 285/08).

———. 2006d. Euromed Partnership: Acting for Gender Equality. luxembourg: 

office for official Publications of the European Communities.

———.  2007a.  Community  Action  Programme  for  Employment  and  Social 
Solidarity – PRoGRESS. Committee for the Implementation of the Community 
Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity - PRoGRESS (2007-2013). 
Proposal for a Framework for the Monitoring and Evaluation of the PRoGRESS 
Programme. Brussels 2007. PRoGRESS/002/2007.

———.  2007b.  Community  Action  Programme  for  Employment  and  Social 
Solidarity – PRoGRESS. Committee for the Implementation of the Community 

294   KEy doCUMENTS doCUMENTARy RESEARCH

Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity - PRoGRESS. PRoGRESS 
2007  ANNUAl  PlAN  oF  WoRK.  Brussels,  21  March  2007. 
PRoGRESS/2006/004-rev.

———. 2007c. Community Action Programme in the Sphere of Employment and 
Social  Solidarity  –  PRoGRESS.  Committee  for  the  Implementation  of  the 
Community Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity - PRoGRESS – 
2007–2013. Brussels, 2007. PRoGRESS/003/2007.

———. 2007d. Gender Equality: A Step Ahead - A Roadmap for the Future. Report 
from the conference organised by the European Commission on 4 and 5 May 
2006.  luxembourg:  office  for  official  Publications  of  the  European 
Communities.

———. 2007e. The Gender Pay Gap – Origins and Policy Responses. A Comparative 
Review of 30 European Countries. luxembourg: office for official Publications 
of the European Communities.

———. 1998. 100 Words for Equality - A Glossary of Terms on Equality Between 

Women and Men. Brussels.

European Communities. 2007. The PRoGRESS programme and the European 

Social Fund 2007-2013. luxembourg 2007.

European  Women  lawyers  Association  (EWlA).  2005.  Comments  on  the 

Proposal for a Recast directive on Gender Equality.

———. 2007. Statement on 2007—European year of Equal opportunities for All 

and the Period of Reflection on the Future of Europe.

European  Women’s  lobby:  Gender  Equality  Road  Map  for  the  European 

Community 2006–2010. Brüssel 2005.

Joint Employment Report. CoM(2000) 551 final.
opinion  of  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  of  6  december  2006  on  the 
Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  The  European 
Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee 
of  the  Regions—A  Roadmap  for  equality  between  women  and  men  2006- 
2010. CoM(2006) 92 final. official Journal C 057, 10/03/2007, 29–33.

opinion  of  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  on  the  “Communication  from  the 
Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the  Economic  and 
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions ‘Towards a Community 
framework Strategy on gender equality’ (2001–2005)”. official Journal C 144, 
16/05/2001.

opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee on the “Communication 
from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic 
and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the  Regions—The  future  of  the 
European Employment Strategy (EES) - A strategy for full employment and better 
jobs for all”. CoM(2003) 6 final. official Journal C 133, 06/06/2003, 38–45.

opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee on the ‘Communication 
from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European 
Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the  Regions—
Modernising social protection for the development of high-quality, accessible 

  KEy doCUMENTS doCUMENTARy RESEARCH 

 

  295

and sustainable health care and long-term care: support for the national strate-
gies using the `open method of coordination´. CoM(2004) 304 final. official 
Journal C 120, 20/05/2005, 135–141.

opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee on the Communication 
from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European 
Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  on 
i2010—A  European  Information  Society  for  growth  and  employment. 
CoM(2005) 229 final. official Journal C 110, 09/05/2006a, 83–88.

opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee on the Communication 
from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions Working 
together, working better: A new framework for the open coordination of social 
protection  and  inclusion  policies  in  the  European  Union.  CoM(2005)  706 
final. official Journal C 185, 08/08/2006b, 87–91.

Regulation (EC) No 1080/2006a of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 5 July 2006 on the European Regional development Fund and repealing 
Regulation (EC) No 1783/1999. official Journal l 210, 31/07/2006, 1–11.
Regulation (EC) No 1081/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 5 July 2006b on the European Social Fund and repealing Regulation (EC) 
No 1784/1999. official Journal l 210, 31/07/2006, 12–18.

Regulation (EC) No 1638/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 24 october 2006 laying down General Provisions Establishing a European 
Neighbourhood  and  Partnership  Instrument.  official  Journal  l  310, 
09/11/2006c, 1–14.

Regulation (EC) No 1922/2006d of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 20 december 2006 on establishing a European Institute for Gender Equality. 
official Journal l 403, 30/12/2006, 9–17.

Regulation (EC) No 806/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
21 April 2004 on Promoting Gender Equality in development Cooperation. 
official Journal l 143, 30/04/2004, p. 40–45.

Report  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament,  the 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Annual 
Report on Equal opportunities for Women and Men in the European Union 
2000. CoM (2001) 179 final.

Report  on  a  Roadmap  for  Equality  Between  Women  and  Men  (2006–2010) 
(2006/2132(INI)).  Committee  on  Women’s  Rights  and  Gender  Equality. 
Rapporteur: Amalia Sartori. A6-0033/2007, 08/02/2007.

Resolution of the Council and of the Ministers for Employment and Social Policy, 
Meeting Within the Council of 29 June 2000 on the Balanced Participation of 
Women  and  Men  in  Family  and  Working  life.  official  Journal  C  218, 
31/07/2000, 5–7.

The Future of the lisbon Strategy from a Gender Perspective. European Parliament 
Resolution on the Future of the lisbon Strategy from the Point of View of the 
Gender Perspective. (2004/2219(INI)). P6_TA(2006)0029.

Index1

A
Abels, Gabriele, 4–6, 51n15, 71, 162, 

258–61

B
backlash triangle, 124
Barroso, José Manuel, 3, 76, 77, 82, 

accountability, 49, 71, 180, 189, 194, 

119, 121–4, 126, 140, 216

202–14, 224, 225, 231, 240, 
243, 256, 257

acquis communautaire, 44, 55n57, 93, 

Belgium, 28, 187
best practice, 4, 42, 56n67, 182, 211
Beveridge, Fiona, 4, 26, 38, 41, 45, 

56n67

boomerang mechanism, 165
boundedness of actors, 115, 144, 186
Bourdieu, Pierre, 14, 51n13, 124, 

137, 142

Bretherton, Charlotte, 27, 44, 164
budget, unknown, 203, 218–25, 238
burden of proof, 40, 56n63, 57n79
BusinessEurope, 151, 169
Butler, Judith, 13, 14

C
Cavaghan, Rosalind, 46, 233n5
Chappell, Louise, 10, 108n1, 116
Checkel, Jeffrey T., 11, 16

187, 190

117, 238

actor-centred approach, 2, 7–9, 48, 

Advisory Committee on Equal 

Opportunities for Women and 
Men, 31, 52n33, 86, 104, 
109n15, 144, 145

advocacy coalition, 2, 9, 27, 164, 166
Advocacy-Coalition-Framework, 9
agency and structure, 7, 11, 12, 14, 

16, 24, 164

Amsterdam Treaty, 3, 28, 37, 39, 40, 45, 
46, 54n50, 54n51, 55n59, 93, 246
anti-discrimination, 40, 43, 46, 55n56
Article 119. See equal pay
Article 141. See equal pay

1 Note: Page numbers with “n” denote footnotes

297

© The Author(s) 2018P. Ahrens, Actors, Institutions, and the Making of  EU Gender Equality Programs, Gender and Politics, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-57060-4298  

INDEX

Christiansen, Thomas, 11, 12, 164
civil society, 3, 35, 45, 71, 72, 83–6, 

D
DAPHNE programme, 41, 46, 47, 

89, 103, 131, 133, 138, 139, 
141, 144, 145, 156, 164, 165, 
196, 196n2, 239, 240, 245, 247, 
248, 251n1

Commission communication, 1, 5, 6, 
53n35, 53n41, 72–6, 83, 88, 93, 
94, 105–8, 109n15, 118, 124, 
125, 127–9, 137, 138, 140, 150, 
155, 157, 163, 176, 191, 195, 
197n16, 202, 204, 240, 244, 250
Commissioners’ College, 75, 76, 80, 

96, 108n3, 157n2, 173, 207
Committee of the Regions (CoR), 
50n1, 57n74, 57n75, 57n81, 
57n82, 57n84, 73, 75, 80, 85, 88, 
89, 106, 108n8, 108n9, 109n17, 
109n18, 111n40, 133, 150, 153, 
157n1, 197n13, 233n4, 255

Community action programme on the 
promotion of equal opportunities 
for women (1982-85), 32, 53n35

Community framework strategy on 

165, 193, 217, 254

deepening and widening, 49, 251
Defrenne, 31, 52n31
de-politicisation, 242–4
Directorate General Employment (DG 

EMPL), 2, 97, 172, 175, 177, 
178, 255

discrimination, direct/indirect, 31, 34, 

52n32

documentary analysis, 25, 253
Draft Treaty establishing a 

Constitution for Europe, 37, 41

dual approach, 40, 44–8

E
ECJ. See European Court of Justice 

(ECJ)

EES. See European Employment 

Strategy (EES)

EESC. See European Economic and 

Social Committee (EESC)

gender equality (2001-2005), 42, 
57n73–5, 197n17, 234n13

EGGSIE. See Expert Group on Gender 

and Social Inclusion (EGGSIE)

compromise, 72, 91, 106, 107, 126, 

EIGE. See European Institute for 

128, 149–54, 156, 168, 188, 
242–4, 246, 248, 249, 251n3

Connell, Raewyn, 14, 124
constructivism. See social 

constructivism

CoR. See Committee of the Regions 

(CoR)

COREPER (Committee of Permanent 

Representatives to the EU), 167
Council of Ministers. See Council of 

the European Union

Council of the European Union, 73, 

85, 248

Gender Equality (EIGE)

enlargement, 3, 37, 44, 55n56, 
55n57, 99, 101, 120, 138, 
197n14, 267

EP. See European Parliament (EP)
epistemic communities, 2, 115, 116, 

155

Equal opportunities for women. 
Medium-term Community 
programme 1986-90, 34, 53n41

Equal Opportunities Unit, 31, 55n57. 

See also Gender Equality Unit

equal pay, 4, 28–31, 40, 52n24, 

Court of Justice of the EU. See 

52n26, 57n79, 188

European Court of Justice (ECJ)

ERDF. See European Regional 

crisis, financial, 47

Development Fund (ERDF)

ESF. See European Social Fund (ESF)
ETUC. See European Trade Union 

Confederation (ETUC)

EU. See European Union (EU)
Europe 2020, 46
European Commission Directorate 

General

Administration and Human 

Resources (DG ADMIN), 99, 
110n29, 110n30, 181

agriculture and rural Development 

(DG AGRI), 101

budget (DG BUDG), 102, 218
communication (DG COMM), 102, 

196

140

competition (DG COMP), 102, 

development and cooperation (DG 

economic and financial affairs (DG 

DEVCO), 101

ECFIN), 102

22, 98, 102

  INDEX 

 

  299

regional and urban policy (DG 

REGIO), 101

research and innovation (DG RTD), 

secretariat general (SG), 140, 142, 

taxation (TAXUD), 102
trade (DG TRADE), 99, 101, 102, 

98, 100

157n2

140

European Council, 26, 30, 32, 35, 39, 
80, 87, 109n16, 109n19, 255, 262

European Court of Justice (ECJ), 
30–4, 43, 46, 52n30, 52n31, 
53n39, 53n40, 55n58

European Economic and Social 

Committee (EESC), 26, 29, 
50n1, 55n56, 57n81, 73–5, 80, 
83, 85, 88, 89, 91, 97, 106, 
108n8, 108n9, 109n17, 109n18, 
111n40, 150, 157n1, 197n13, 
255, 262, 263

education and culture (DG EAC), 

European Employment Strategy 

(EES), 41, 56n67, 56n69, 210

employment, social Affairs & 

inclusion (DG EMPL), 2, 
55n56, 88, 97, 172, 175, 177, 
178, 255

enlargement (DG ENLARG), 37, 

European Institute for Gender 

Equality (EIGE), 2, 45

European Network to Promote 
Women’s Entrepreneurship 
(WES), 39, 43

101

European Parliament (EP), 1, 3, 4, 18, 

Enterprise and Industry (DG 

ENTR), 22, 55n56

environment (DG ENVI), 102
health and consumers affairs (DG 

SANCO), 89

humanitarian aid & civil protection 

(ECHO), 101, 110n37

internal market and services (DG 

MARKT), 22, 32, 55n56, 90, 
102

justice (DG JUST), 2, 3, 45, 47, 91, 

245

maritime affairs and fisheries (DG 

MARE), 101

26, 29–32, 34, 35, 39, 50n1, 
55n59, 56n64, 57n74, 57n75, 
57n80–57n82, 57n84, 72–5, 
80–2, 85, 88–90, 95, 103, 105, 
108n8, 108n9, 109n17, 109n18, 
109n23, 111n40, 120, 122, 134, 
137, 139, 144, 157n1, 168, 173, 
177, 185, 197n11, 197n13, 
197n17, 218, 227, 233n1, 
233n4, 234n7, 234n13, 234n15, 
240, 248, 255, 258, 262, 263

Committee on Civil Liberties, 
Justice and Home Affairs 
(LIBE), 109–10n24, 109n22

300  

INDEX

European Parliament (EP cont.)
Committee on Development 
(DEVE), 109–10n24,  
109n22

Committee on Foreign Affairs 

(AFET), 103, 109n22

Committee on Industry, Research 

and Energy (ITRE), 
109–10n24

Committee on Women’s Rights and 
Gender Equality (FEMM) (see 
(FEMM committee))

European Regional Development 

Fund (ERDF), 29, 41, 110n33, 
232

European Social Fund (ESF), 110n33, 

193, 217, 223

European Trade Union Confederation 

(ETUC), 32, 35, 39, 56n61, 
56n62, 82, 85, 97, 104, 111n43, 
150, 151, 169, 177

European Union (EU), 1, 3, 4, 26, 
28, 33, 36, 50n3, 73, 85, 93, 
138, 187, 189, 234n16, 248, 
255, 267n2

European Women Lawyers’ 
Association (EWLA), 39

European Women’s Lobby (EWL),  

34, 37, 74, 78, 83–7, 90, 96, 98, 
103, 104, 109n13, 109n14, 117, 
122, 132, 133, 135, 137, 144–9, 
151, 166, 167, 169, 173, 196, 
204, 222

European Youth Forum, 84
EWL. See European Women’s Lobby 

(EWL)

EWLA. See European Women 

Lawyers’ Association (EWLA)

Expert Group on Gender and Social 

Inclusion (EGGSIE), 39, 43

expert interviews, 25, 26, 253, 254, 

257–67

F
factivity, 16, 76, 106
FEMM committee, 35, 37, 40, 46, 

54n44, 84, 89–92, 95, 96, 103, 
106, 119, 122–4, 149–56, 
157n5, 168, 169, 172, 183, 192, 
205, 214–16, 220, 222, 225, 
227, 231, 232, 240–3

femocrats, 43
Fourth medium-term Community 

action programme on equal 
opportunities for men and women 
(1996 to 2000), 41

FP 7. See Seventh Framework 

Programme (FP 7)
framing, 26, 151, 268n4

G
gender budgeting, 78, 129, 183, 219
gendered organization/genderedness 

of organizations, 14

gendered power relations, 14, 22, 103, 

142, 243

Gender Equality Unit, 2, 55n57, 

77–80, 85, 87, 92–6, 98–100, 
102, 103, 106, 107, 117, 121, 
122, 125–7, 129, 132, 134, 
136–47, 149, 155–7, 167, 172, 
181, 188, 192, 196, 205, 207, 
214, 218, 221–3, 230, 232, 
234n7, 234n14, 238, 240–6

gender equality pact, 185
gender lunch, 83, 84, 103, 145, 169, 

183, 240

gender mainstreaming (GM), 4, 5, 27, 

28, 36–47, 54n52, 54n53, 
55n55, 56n67, 74, 83, 86, 87, 
92, 93, 95, 98, 100, 102, 104, 
106, 107, 110n31, 110n34, 116, 
119, 125, 126, 129, 130, 135, 
138–44, 151, 154, 155, 157, 

  INDEX 

 

  301

165, 179–81, 183–7, 189, 204, 
210, 211, 219, 220, 223, 233n5, 
237, 238, 241, 244, 246, 247, 
249, 250

gender regime, 5, 13, 44, 47, 51n15
Germany, 28, 33, 41, 57n77, 86, 217
Giddens, Anthony, 8, 12–21, 25, 

51n14–20, 76, 106, 115, 119, 
142, 145

Glaser, Barney G., 26, 253
GM. See gender mainstreaming (GM)
Greenwood, Justin, 3, 27, 35, 122
grounded theory, 26, 253, 264, 265
Group of Commissioners on 

Fundamental Rights, Non- 
Discrimination and Equal 
Opportunities, 55n56

I
impact assessment, 79, 80, 87,  

96, 103, 107, 108n9, 110n26, 
111n40, 139, 141, 157n1, 184, 
197n13, 211

informal rule, 3, 7, 21, 27, 72, 73,  

90, 92, 95, 115, 155, 187,  
207, 267

institutionalism, 9, 10, 107n1, 163, 

238

integrated approach, 42
interest groups, 3, 9, 18, 27, 76, 106, 

164, 169, 170

inter-institutional process, 72, 74, 75, 

86, 88, 161, 163, 192, 240

International Labour Organization 

(ILO), 29

Group of Experts on Gender Equality 

in development cooperation, 43

intersectionality, 44, 50n2
interservice consultation, 76, 79, 80, 

53n40, 144, 162, 180, 233

Kohler-Koch, Beate, 162, 247, 251n1

Group of Specialists on 

Mainstreaming, 38, 55n55, 
110n31, 140

Guiraudon, Virginie, 7, 8, 40, 56n60

H
Hafner-Burton, Emilie, 28, 99
Hantrais, Linda, 27, 29
hard law, 1, 4, 50n5, 50n6, 72, 74, 

83, 106, 108n2, 183

Hartlapp, Miriam, 72, 76, 77, 80, 94, 

95, 106, 143, 207

hegemonic masculinity, 124
Helsinki Group, 43, 100, 110n32
High Level Group on Gender 

Mainstreaming, 74, 86, 87, 102, 
104, 138, 140, 141, 155, 185, 
186

Hooghe, Liesbet, 16, 22, 141, 162, 

259

Hoskyns, Catherine, 4, 6, 30, 34, 36, 

94, 95, 98, 128, 129, 173

inter-service group on gender equality, 

39, 45, 77, 78, 83, 93, 99, 101, 
104, 106, 134, 143, 147, 212, 
248

Ireland, 29, 217

J
Jacquot, Sophie, 3, 4, 16, 23, 31, 40, 

43, 45, 46, 53n39, 72, 79, 82, 
142, 220, 234, 246

K
Kantola, Johanna, 4, 45
Kenny, Meryl, 10, 108n1, 116
Kingdon, John W., 9, 15, 170, 244
Klüver, Heike, 164, 183
knowledgeability, 15, 17, 25, 27, 115, 

118, 121, 127, 144, 155, 195, 
227, 256, 257

302  

INDEX

L
Lang, Sabine, 27, 50n10, 109n21, 

N
network governance, 8, 162–4, 194, 

122, 164

Lewis, Jane, 30, 33, 245
Liebert, Ulrike, 33, 54n46, 247
Lisbon Strategy, 46
Lisbon Treaty, 3, 6, 44, 45, 53n38, 

110n35, 138, 234n10

lobbying, 35, 37, 40, 43, 76, 83, 85, 

119, 120, 136, 145, 146, 148, 
155, 156, 165, 169, 215, 231, 
241

Locher, Birgit, 10, 162, 165
Lombardo, Emanuela, 4, 11, 17, 23, 

24, 38, 41, 44, 45

M
Maastricht Treaty, 33, 34, 36, 52n24, 

197n9

Mackay, Fiona, 10, 108n1, 116
Malta, 54n48, 217
Mazey, Sonia, 34, 35, 44, 162, 165
member states, 1–5, 7, 27, 29–33, 35, 
37, 39–42, 44–8, 52n26, 53n33, 
54n46, 54n51, 55n57, 56n60, 
57n76, 71, 72, 74, 75, 81, 83, 
84, 86–8, 91, 102, 104–6, 
110n32, 111n39, 111n42, 118, 
124, 127, 131, 132, 134–9, 141, 
149–57, 169, 170, 182–91, 194, 
196, 196n6, 197n8, 203–6, 208, 
210, 211, 213, 215–18, 222, 
229, 230, 232, 233, 234n9, 
234n11, 234n13, 237, 239, 245, 
246, 249, 250, 263

Mérand, Frédéric, 8, 137, 259
MLG. See multi-level governance 

(MLG)

Montoya, Celeste, 27, 46, 165
moving target, 7
multi-level governance (MLG), 8, 

162, 163, 165, 196n1

New Opportunities for Women 

195, 196n1

(NOW), 34

NGOs, 18, 26, 40, 50n10, 74, 79, 81, 

83, 84, 86, 104, 106, 107, 
111n39, 122, 132, 145, 148, 
153, 155, 162, 167, 169, 170, 
173–6, 181, 188–90, 205, 210, 
222, 231, 232, 240–2, 247, 248, 
256, 262, 263

normalisation, 238, 239, 242, 244–51

O
OMC. See Open Method of 

Coordination (OMC)

Open Method of Coordination 

(OMC), 4, 41, 46, 50n6, 56n67, 
56n68, 83, 169

P
path-dependency, 116, 142, 163, 238
Poland, 54n48
policy implications, 6, 48, 49, 107, 
136, 194, 202–32, 241, 246, 
250, 267

policy networks/networks, 3, 27, 42, 
43, 46, 93, 107, 117, 139, 142, 
156, 162–77, 196n2, 202, 239, 
246, 248

policy process, 2, 7–9, 14, 17–20, 

22–6, 38, 41, 48, 49, 50n11, 72, 
73, 88–92, 94–8, 102, 104–6, 
115–17, 121, 126, 134, 142, 
143, 145, 151, 153, 155, 156, 
161, 163, 166, 167, 170, 171, 
173, 174, 177, 180–2, 191, 195, 
203–31, 238, 241, 242, 244, 
245, 248–50, 254–60, 264, 266
political opportunity structure, 9, 165

positive action, 6, 33, 34, 36, 38, 40, 

Richardson, Jeremy, 35, 72, 76, 162, 

55n54, 55n58, 196n7

197n12

power relations, 14, 22, 49, 103, 

Roadmap for Equality between 

  INDEX 

 

  303

107n1, 116, 135, 142, 174, 211, 
243, 247

practical consciousness, 12, 15, 16, 26, 

106, 120, 129, 133, 145

primacy of home institution, 239–42, 

249

Programme relating to the 

Community framework strategy 
on gender equality (2001-2005), 
42, 57n73, 234n13

PROGRESS Community Programme 

for Employment and Social 
Solidarity, 47, 217, 234n15

Q
QNA. See qualitative network analysis 

(QNA)

qualified majority voting, 32, 40, 48
qualitative network analysis (QNA), 

25, 163, 170, 171, 196n3

quotas, 45, 181, 229

R
Rees, Teresa L., 34, 36, 38, 54n53, 

RELEX family, 101, 110n35, 219, 

233

223

reproductive rights, 36, 44
resources, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, 13,  

20–2, 25, 26, 36, 47, 51n14, 
51n17, 92, 105, 110n29, 
110n30, 117, 122, 128, 138, 
142, 145, 146, 164, 181, 202, 
203, 211, 212, 217–21, 225, 
229, 232, 238, 241, 251n2,  
256, 257, 265, 267

257

Women and Men 2006-2010, 2, 
46, 49, 50n1, 57n81, 72, 105, 
108n8, 108n9, 109n17, 109n18, 
109n23, 111n40, 157n1, 
197n13, 233n1, 233n4, 249

Rolandsen Agustín, Lise, 44, 46
routines, 12, 13, 16, 20–3, 25, 26, 28, 
49, 73, 83, 85, 88, 92–105, 107, 
117, 118, 120, 121, 124, 125, 
127–9, 133, 138–40, 149, 152, 
155, 156, 161, 162, 166, 167, 
174, 176, 177, 181–3, 185, 189, 
190, 194, 195, 202, 214, 224, 
225, 231, 232, 238, 240–5, 
248–50, 257, 267

rules, 3–5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 19–28, 
38, 41, 45, 49, 51n14, 51n18, 
51n19, 53n38, 55n58, 72, 73, 
75, 83, 90, 92–107, 108n3, 
108n4, 110n25, 115–18, 122, 
126, 128, 129, 138, 140, 143, 
146, 147, 155–7, 173, 175, 176, 
179, 181, 187, 189, 190, 194–6, 
196n2, 196n4, 207, 218, 224, 
238, 240, 244–6, 248–50, 256–8, 
265, 267

S
Sabatier, Paul A., 2, 9, 27
Saurugger, Sabine, 2, 8, 48, 162
SEA. See Single European Act (SEA)
Seventh Framework Programme (FP 

7), 193, 203, 214

shadow roadmap, 83–5, 97, 119, 131, 

Single European Act (SEA), 32, 34, 

135, 148

36, 52n25

233, 235n19

retrenchment, 1, 2, 8, 47, 48, 243, 

social action programme, 29, 154, 

304  

INDEX

social constructivism, 8, 10, 11
social dialogue, 33, 40, 186, 197n10
social Europe, 29–32, 185
socialization, 7, 8, 17, 141
social movements, 35, 50n10, 164
Social Partners, 5, 18, 26, 27, 31–3, 
35, 39, 47, 74, 78, 79, 81, 82, 
86, 95–8, 102, 104, 105, 129, 
132, 137, 139, 141, 145, 151, 
157, 170, 175, 182, 188, 190, 
196, 196n2, 197n10, 203–5, 
215, 216, 229, 237, 239, 250, 
255, 256, 262, 263

T
Thelen, Kathleen, 10, 116, 157
Third medium-term Community 
action programme on equal 
opportunities for women and men 
(1991-95), 34, 53n42

throughput legitimacy, 71, 72,  

Transnational Advocacy Networks 

107n1

(TAN), 165

Treaty of Amsterdam, 3, 28, 37, 39, 

40, 45, 46, 54n50, 54n51, 
55n59, 93, 246

social policy, 4, 26, 29, 31, 44, 52n24, 

Treaty of Rome, 4, 29

52n26, 53n43, 72, 89

sociological approach, 7, 8, 25, 26, 48, 

117, 238, 264

soft law, 1, 2, 4–6, 31, 33, 36, 40, 41, 
46, 48, 50n6, 71, 72, 74, 75, 92, 
105, 122, 124, 156, 162, 194, 
202, 203, 210, 232, 238, 248, 
249

Špidla, Vladimir, 82, 90, 97, 123, 124, 

136, 149, 150, 216, 227

spill-back, 202
spillover, 202
Squires, Judith, 44, 54–5n54
strategic conduct analysis, 8, 12
Strategic engagement for gender 

equality 2016-2019, 1, 2, 46, 248

Strauss, Anselm, 26, 164, 253, 262, 

structuration theory, 6, 8, 11–25, 49, 

264–6

51n19, 245

structure, 77, 82, 94, 105–7, 116, 
117, 126, 143, 161, 164, 165, 
169, 190, 207, 219, 239, 247, 
250, 256–8, 262, 265–7
structure and agency, 12, 24
subsidiarity, 4, 183–91, 197n9, 206
Sweden, 37, 54n47, 186, 187

U
unanimity, 29, 33, 48, 52n25,  

53n38

UN Fourth World Conference on 

Women and Beijing Platform for 
Action, 37, 46

unintended consequence, 2, 8, 16,  
17, 48, 49, 76, 107, 116, 124, 
139, 143, 155, 183, 184,  
202, 205, 217, 225, 230,  
232, 241

Union of Industrial and Employers’ 

Confederations of Europe 
(BusinessEurope). See Business 
Europe

V
Van der Vleuten, Anna, 1, 4, 29, 31–3, 

40, 41, 46, 52n26, 56n65, 185, 
188, 233

velvet triangle, 23, 43, 79, 107, 115, 

116, 139, 155, 162, 238–40, 
242, 246, 248

Verloo, Mieke, 44, 45, 55n56

W
Walby, Sylvia, 13, 37, 38, 44, 54–5n54
WAVE. See Women Against Violence 

Europe (WAVE)

Waylen, Georgina, 10, 108n1, 116
WES. See European Network to 

Promote Women’s 
Entrepreneurship (WES)

windows of opportunity, 9, 15, 244
Wolffensberger, Joan, 12–14, 21

  INDEX 

 

  305

Women Against Violence Europe 

(WAVE), 35, 39, 43

women’s charter, 46
women’s movement, 27, 31, 35, 36, 

41, 43, 50n10, 51n16, 153, 166, 
170, 246–8

Woodward, Alison, 7, 19, 23, 27, 36, 

38, 43, 44, 82, 107, 115, 139, 
164, 168, 180, 233, 239, 240, 
246–8

